Citation: Miao, G.; Liang, L.; Li, W.;
Ma, C.; Pan, Y.; Zhao, H.; Zhang, Q.;
Xiao, Y.; Yang, X. 3D Bioprinting of a
Bioactive Composite Scaffold for Cell
Delivery in Periodontal Tissue
Regeneration. Biomolecules 2023 ,13,
1062. https://doi.org/10.3390/
biom13071062
Academic Editor: Pietro Matricardi
Received: 4 June 2023
Accepted: 22 June 2023
Published: 30 June 2023
Copyright: © 2023 by the authors.
Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland.
This article is an open access article
distributed under the terms and
conditions of the Creative Commons
Attribution (CC BY) license (https://
creativecommons.org/licenses/by/
4.0/).
biomolecules
Article
3D Bioprinting of a Bioactive Composite Scaffold for Cell
Delivery in Periodontal Tissue Regeneration
Guohou Miao1,2,†, Liyu Liang3,†, Wenzhi Li1,2, Chaoyang Ma1,2, Yuqian Pan1,2, Hongling Zhao1,2,
Qing Zhang1,2,4
, Yin Xiao1,5,6,*
and Xuechao Yang1,2,*
1Guangzhou Key Laboratory of Basic and Applied Research of Oral Regenerative Medicine, Afﬁliated
Stomatology Hospital of Guangzhou Medical University, Guangdong Engineering Research Center of Oral
Restoration and Reconstruction, Guangzhou 510182, China
2School and Hospital of Stomatology, Guangzhou Medical University, Guangzhou 510182, China
3Hospital of Stomatology, Zhongshan 528404, China
4Laboratory for Myology, Department of Human Movement Sciences, Faculty of Behavioral and Movement
Sciences, Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, Amsterdam Movement Sciences,
1081 BT Amsterdam, The Netherlands
5School of Medicine and Dentistry, Menzies Health Institute Queensland, Grifﬁth University,
Gold Coast, QLD 4222, Australia
6The Australia-China Centre for Tissue Engineering and Regenerative Medicine (ACCTERM), Queensland
University of Technology, Brisbane, QLD 4000, Australia
*Correspondence: yin.xiao@grifﬁth.edu.au (Y.X.); xcyang@gzhmu.edu.cn (X.Y.)
† These authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract: Hydrogels have been widely applied to the fabrication of tissue engineering scaffolds via
three-dimensional (3D) bioprinting because of their extracellular matrix-like properties, capacity for
living cell encapsulation, and shapeable customization depending on the defect shape. However,
the current hydrogel scaffolds show limited regeneration activity, especially in the application of
periodontal tissue regeneration. In this study, we attempted to develop a novel multi-component
hydrogel that possesses good biological activity, can wrap living cells for 3D bioprinting and can
regenerate periodontal soft and hard tissue. The multi-component hydrogel consisted of gelatin
methacryloyl (GelMA), sodium alginate (SA) and bioactive glass microsphere (BGM), which was
ﬁrst processed into hydrogel scaffolds by cell-free 3D printing to evaluate its printability and in vitro
biological performances. The cell-free 3D-printed scaffolds showed uniform porous structures and
good swelling capability. The BGM-loaded scaffold exhibited good biocompatibility, enhanced
osteogenic differentiation, apatite formation abilities and desired mechanical strength. The composite
hydrogel was further applied as a bio-ink to load with mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells
(mBMSCs) and growth factors (BMP2 and PDGF) for the fabrication of a scaffold for periodontal
tissue regeneration. The cell wrapped in the hydrogel still maintained good cellular vitality after
3D bioprinting and showed enhanced osteogenic differentiation and soft tissue repair capabilities in
BMP2- and PDGF-loaded scaffolds. It was noted that after transplantation of the cell- and growth
factor-laden scaffolds in Beagle dog periodontal defects, signiﬁcant regeneration of gingival tissue,
periodontal ligament, and alveolar bone was detected. Importantly, a reconstructed periodontal
structure was established in the treatment group eight weeks post-transplantation of the scaffolds
containing the cell and growth factors. In conclusion, we developed a bioactive composite bio-ink
for the fabrication of scaffolds applicable for the reconstruction and regeneration of periodontal
tissue defects.
Keywords: 3D bioprinting; cell-laden scaffold; composite hydrogel; periodontal regeneration
1. Introduction
Periodontal disease often results in defects in both bone tissue and soft tissue of gin-
giva [ 1–5]. However, current clinical treatments are unable to effectively repair both types
Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062. https://doi.org/10.3390/biom13071062 https://www.mdpi.com/journal/biomoleculesBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 2 of 22
of tissue simultaneously [ 6,7]. In recent years, the application of 3D printing technology
in tissue engineering has provided the possibility for accurate adjustment of the spatial
structure and pore structure of scaffolds [ 8–10]. In addition, 3D bioprinting technology
has gradually become a research hotspot in the ﬁeld of regenerative medicine because it
can realize the layer-by-layer printing of biological inks containing biological materials,
bioactive factors and cells, which provides a novel method for the personalized repair of
tissue defects [11–13], especially for periodontal tissue defects.
The application of biomaterials in the treatment of periodontal tissue defects has
been widely studied and has achieved good clinical achievements. For example, Muham-
mad S Shaikh et al. carried out meta-analyses regarding the clinical outcomes of nano-
hydroxyapatite or bovine-derived hydroxyapatite/cell-binding peptide complexes for
regeneration of periodontal defects; the results showed that the above two biomaterials
showed better therapeutic effects than open-ﬂap debridement in the treatment of peri-
odontal intrabony defects [ 14,15]. However, this class of inorganic biomaterials is mostly
granular and cannot be easily shaped to scaffolds for irregular bone defects. Hydrogels
are considered as ideal scaffold materials for tissue repair due to their microstructures and
physicochemical properties similar to the natural extracellular matrix (ECM), which is not
only conducive to cell attachment, migration and proliferation [ 16,17], but also can encapsu-
late living cells and maintain cell phenotypes and induce differentiation [ 18]. Moreover, the
cell-laden hydrogels are suitable as bio-inks for 3D bioprinting to construct personalized
scaffolds and show great potential in diverse biomedical applications [ 19,20], particularly
in periodontal tissue regeneration and repair. While a range of materials and techniques
have been employed to design and construct cell-laden hydrogels for this purpose, there
remains room for improvement in terms of in vitro bioactivity and the ability to regenerate
both soft and hard periodontal tissue.
Gelatin methacryloyl (GelMA) is a kind of modiﬁed gelatin with photosensitive func-
tional groups; it has attracted increasing interest in the preparation of 3D-printed bone
tissue engineering scaffolds and cell delivery in recent years [ 21–23]. However, due to
the poor mechanical properties and temperature sensitivity, it is difﬁcult to directly print
biological scaffolds by extrusion-based 3D printing, which restricts its use in bone tissue
engineering. Blending of other biomaterials (sodium alginate, SA) capable of forming hy-
drogels has been used to improve the printability of bio-inks, the biological and mechanical
properties of which can be custom-tailored according to different requirements [ 24–26]. Ad-
ditionally, inorganic bioactive components (hydroxyapatite, nano clay, bioactive glass, etc.)
are usually introduced to organic matrices to further enhance the biological properties
of bio-inks [ 27,28]. Due to its excellent in vitro bioactivity, osteogenic activity and soft
tissue repair ability, bioactive glass microspheres (BGMs) have attracted extensive attention
in the ﬁeld of tissue regeneration and have been used as bioactive ﬁllers incorporated
into hydrogel matrixes to improve their ability to repair bone or skin soft tissue [ 29]. The
addition of BGM into GelMA hydrogels could signiﬁcantly improve their physicochemical
and biological properties [ 28]. Although GelMA, BGM and SA are promising materi-
als for hydrogel scaffolds, their suitability as bio-inks for the 3D bioprinting of cell- and
growth factor-loaded hydrogel scaffolds for periodontal tissue regeneration has yet to
be determined.
Therefore, in this study, we aimed to develop a novel composite hydrogel with good
bioactivity and biological properties, which can be fabricated into porous scaffolds by
3D printing and can be used as a bio-ink for cell bioprinting to prepare personalized
restorative scaffolds for regeneration of periodontal soft and hard tissue. GelMA, SA and
BGM were employed to prepare a composite hydrogel and fabricated porous scaffolds
by 3D printing. The physicochemical properties and in vitro biological performance of
the 3D-printed scaffolds were investigated. After that, we applied the above-mentioned
hydrogel as a bio-ink to living cells and growth factors for the fabrication of a scaffold
for periodontal tissue. Mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (mBMSCs) were
used as model cells wrapped in the 3D-bioprinted hydrogel scaffolds because of theBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 3 of 22
multidirectional differentiation potential of stem cells. To further improve the periodontal
tissue repair ability of the cell-loaded scaffolds, BMP-2 and PDGF were added to the
hydrogel for promoting the simultaneous repair of bone tissue and gingival soft tissue.
The survivability and differentiation capability of the cells in the scaffolds as well as the
capability of in vivo periodontal tissue regeneration were studied. There are few reports
regarding the construction of bifunctional cell-laden hydrogel scaffolds in combination
with BMP2 and PDGF for periodontal tissue repair. This research will present a good option
for 3D bioprinting of bioactive scaffolds for simultaneous repair of periodontal bone and
soft tissue. The fabrication and characterization of 3D-printed GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds
and 3D-bioprinted GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds with cell and growth-factor scaffolds are
illustrated in Figure 1.
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 3 of 22 
 
as a bio-ink to living cells and growth factors for the fabrication of a scaffold for periodon-
tal tissue. Mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (mBMSCs) were used as model 
cells wrapped in the 3D-bioprinted hydrogel scaffolds because of the multidirectional dif-ferentiation potential of stem cells. To furthe r improve the periodontal tissue repair ability 
of the cell-loaded scaffolds, BMP-2 and PDGF  were added to the hydrogel for promoting 
the simultaneous repair of bone tissue and gingival soft tissue. The survivability and dif-
ferentiation capability of the cells in the scaffolds as well as the capability of in vivo peri-
odontal tissue regeneration we re studied. There are few reports regarding the construc-
tion of bifunctional cell-laden hydrogel scaffolds in combination with BMP2 and PDGF 
for periodontal tissue repair. This research wi ll present a good option for 3D bioprinting 
of bioactive scaffolds for simultaneous repair of periodontal bone and soft tissue. The fab-rication and characterization of 3D-printed GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds and 3D-bioprinted 
GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds with cell and growth-factor scaffolds are illustrated in Figure 
1. 
 
Figure 1. Flowchart of fabrication and characterization of 3D-printed GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold and 
3D-bioprinted cell- and growth fa ctor-laden GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. 
2. Materials and Methods 
2.1. Materials 
Anhydrous ethanol (AE), HCl, K 2HPO 4·3H 2O, MgCl 2·6H 2O, Na 2SO 4 and NaCl were 
purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co ., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Dodecylamine 
(DDA), Methacrylic anhydride (MA), Photoiniti ator 2959 (PI-2959), Gelatin (G), sodium 
alginate (SA), CaCl 2, Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), Triethyl phosphate (TEP) and 
Ca(NO 3)2·4H 2O (CN) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). 
Collagenase type II, Tris, β-glycerophosphate sodium, Ascorbic acid, Dexamethasone and 
Cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO, 
USA). Dulbecco’s modified eagle’s medium (DMEM), Penicillin–Streptomycin Solution 
(100 U/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin), fetal bovine serum (FBS), Phosphate buffer (PBS) and Trypsin-EDTA (0.25%) were purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher, Waltham, 
MA, USA). C57BL/6 mouse bone marrow mese nchymal stem cells (mBMSCs) were pur-
chased from Cyagen Biosciences Inc. (Guangzhou, China). Triton X-100 was purchased 
from Beijing Dingguo Changsheng Biotechnology (Beijing, China). Cell Counting Kit-8 
was purchased from Dojindo (Kumamoto Ken,  Japan). BCIP/NBT Alkaline Phosphatase 
Color Development Kit was purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology (Shanghai, China). 
Figure 1. Flowchart of fabrication and characterization of 3D-printed GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold and
3D-bioprinted cell- and growth factor-laden GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold.
2. Materials and Methods
2.1. Materials
Anhydrous ethanol (AE), HCl, K 2HPO 43H2O, MgCl 26H2O, Na 2SO4and NaCl were
purchased from Sinopharm Chemical Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China). Dodecy-
lamine (DDA), Methacrylic anhydride (MA), Photoinitiator 2959 (PI-2959), Gelatin (G),
sodium alginate (SA), CaCl 2, Tetraethyl orthosilicate (TEOS), Triethyl phosphate (TEP) and
Ca(NO 3)24H2O (CN) were purchased from Aladdin Reagent Co., Ltd. (Shanghai, China).
Collagenase type II, Tris, -glycerophosphate sodium, Ascorbic acid, Dexamethasone and
Cetylpyridinium chloride (CPC) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (Saint Louis, MO,
USA). Dulbecco’s modiﬁed eagle’s medium (DMEM), Penicillin–Streptomycin Solution
(100 U/mL streptomycin, 100 U/mL penicillin), fetal bovine serum (FBS), Phosphate buffer
(PBS) and Trypsin-EDTA (0.25%) were purchased from Gibco (Thermo Fisher, Waltham,
MA, USA). C57BL/6 mouse bone marrow mesenchymal stem cells (mBMSCs) were pur-
chased from Cyagen Biosciences Inc. (Guangzhou, China). Triton X-100 was purchased
from Beijing Dingguo Changsheng Biotechnology (Beijing, China). Cell Counting Kit-8
was purchased from Dojindo (Kumamoto Ken, Japan). BCIP/NBT Alkaline Phosphatase
Color Development Kit was purchased from Beyotime Biotechnology (Shanghai, China).
Alkaline Phosphatase testing kit (AKP testing kit) was purchased from Nanjing Jiancheng
Biotechnology Co., Ltd. (Nanjing, China). Live-Death Staining Kit, BCA Protein Assay Kit
and Alizarin Red staining solution (1%, pH 4.2) were purchased from Bestbio (Shanghai,
China). RNase-free water was purchased from Leagene Biotechnology (Beijing, China).
TRIzol ™Reagent was purchased from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). Prime ScriptTMRTBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 4 of 22
Master Mix (Perfect Real Time) and TB GreenTMPremix Ex Taq ™II (Tli RNaseh Plus) were
purchased from Takara (Kyoto, Japan).
2.2. Synthesis of BGM
The BGM was synthesized according to the previous literature [ 30]. The molar compo-
sition of BGM was 60% SiO 2, 36% CaO and 4% P 2O5. Brieﬂy, 3 g of DDA was dissolved in a
mixed solution of AE (80 mL) and deionized water (25 mL) at 40C. Then, 10.9 mL of TEOS
and 1.1 mL triethyl phosphate (TEP) were added successively at a rate of 0.5 mL/min,
and each was stirred for 0.5 h. After that, 6.87 g of CN was added to the above solution,
stirred for 3 h and aged for 24 h at room temperature. The white precipitates collected
by centrifugation were washed alternately with AE and distilled water 2 to 3 times. The
precipitates were dried in a freeze-dryer for 48 h and calcined at 600C for 3 h. The mor-
phology and microstructure of BGM were characterized by scanning electron microscopy
(SEM, DSM 982-Gemini, Zeiss, Oberkochen, Germany) and X-ray diffraction (XRD, X’pert
PRO, PANalytical, Almelo, The Netherlands), respectively. The chemical composition was
determined by energy dispersive spectroscopy (EDS).
2.3. Synthesis of GelMA
GelMA was prepared in accordance with a previous study [ 31]. Brieﬂy, 10 g of G was
fully dissolved into 100 mL of phosphate buffer saline (PBS) at 60C, and 8 mL of MA was
slowly added at a rate of 0.5 mL min 1under vigorous stirring. After 3 h of reaction, the
mixture solution was dialyzed against distilled water to remove unreacted components
through dialysis membranes (12–14 kDa molecular weight cut-off) at 40C for 7 days.
Finally, the dialyzed solution was centrifuged and freeze-dried, and the lyophilized GelMA
was stored at 20C for future use.
2.4. Preparation of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM 3D-Printed Scaffolds
Before printing, the inks were ﬁrst prepared. The lyophilized GelMA (15% w/v),
BGM (5% w/v) and PI 2959 (0.5% w/v) were dissolved in deionized water to obtain a
homogenous ink. A certain amount of SA (10% w/v) solution was added to the above
ink to improve its printability. The ink was transferred to a printing barrel with a nozzle
(400 m inner diameter) that was ﬁxed to a 3D printer (3D-bio printer, Bio-Architect®WS,
Regenovo, Hangzhou, China). The distance between the grids was 1 mm. The temperature
of the ink was set at 20C, and the printing platform was adjusted to 5C to make the
extruded strands solidify and obtain an initial intensity. The GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold
was printed as designed by extrusion, layer by layer. After printing, the scaffold was
transferred to a 4% CaCl 2solution, cross-linked for 5 min, irradiated for 30 s under 365 nm
UV light, washed with deionized water three times, frozen at  80C overnight, and ﬁnally
freeze-dried for 48 h. Pure GelMA/SA scaffold without BGM was also prepared with the
same parameters.
2.5. Characterization of 3D-Printed Scaffolds
2.5.1. SEM Observation
The surface microstructure was characterized by scanning electron microscopy (SEM,
S-3400N, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan) at an accelerating voltage of 15 kV . Before observation, the
lyophilized samples were sputter-coated with gold. The surface elemental composition
was detected by an energy dispersive X-ray spectrometer (EDS) equipped on the SEM.
2.5.2. Swelling Test
To measure the equilibrium swelling ratio, samples were completely lyophilized, and
the dry weight was recorded (W d). Then, the samples were soaked in PBS at 37C for 24 h.
The swollen samples were weighed (Ws) after gently wiping the surface using ﬁlter paper.
The swelling ratio was calculated as (Ws  Wd)/W d100%.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 5 of 22
2.5.3. In Vitro Degradation Test
The degradation properties of composite hydrogel scaffolds were evaluated using
collagenase solution. The lyophilized samples were weighed (W 0) and immersed in col-
lagenase II solution at a concentration of 2.5 U/mL at 37C. The samples were collected
at speciﬁed time points (6, 12, 24, and 48 h), washed with deionized water, and then com-
pletely lyophilized. The weight of the dried samples after degradation was measured as
Wd. The degradation ratio was calculated with the following equation: (W d/W 0)100%.
2.5.4. Mechanical Properties
The compression properties of composite hydrogel scaffolds were measured by a
universal testing machine (Instron 336, Norwood, MA, USA). The samples used in the
compression test were prepared in a cylinder, 10 mm in diameter and 2 mm in height.
The stress–strain curve was recorded at a compression rate of 0.5 mm. The compression
modulus was calculated using the slope of the linear deformation stage (10–20%) of the
stress–strain curve.
2.5.5. In Vitro Bioactivity
The in vitro bioactivity of composite hydrogel scaffolds was evaluated by inducing
apatite formation on the scaffold surface. All samples (10 mm 10 mm5 mm) were
immersed in 50 mL of 2 simulated body ﬂuid (SBF) at 37C. After 3 and 7 days of
immersion, the samples were collected, freeze-dried, and observed by SEM and XRD.
2.6. In Vitro Biocompatibility
2.6.1. Cell Viability and Morphology
Before cell experiments, the scaffolds were treated under UV irradiation and 75%
ethanol immersion for sterilization, washed three times with PBS, placed in 12-well plates,
and incubated with DMEM overnight. After the scaffolds were incubated in the cell
incubator for 30 min, the cell suspension (1 mL, 1 106cells/mL) was added on each
scaffold and incubated at 37C in 5% CO 2. After 3 d and 7 d of culture, the cell viability
on the scaffolds was evaluated using a Live-Death Staining Kit (Bestbio, Shanghai, China).
The cell-laden scaffolds were rinsed with PBS three times and incubated with a 2 M
Calcein AM solution at room temperature for 30 min. Then, the scaffolds were thoroughly
rinsed with PBS twice and incubated with 4 M EthD-1 for 2 min. The living cells stained
by Calcein AM and dead cells stained by EthD-1 were visualized using a ﬂuorescence
microscope (DMI3000B, Leica, Weztlar, Germany). SEM (S-3400N, Hitachi, Tokyo, Japan)
was used to observe the cell morphology on the scaffolds after 4% paraformaldehyde
ﬁxation, gradient alcohol dehydration, and freeze-drying.
2.6.2. Cell Proliferation
The scaffold extracts were used for cell proliferation and osteogenesis assays. Brieﬂy,
the sterilized GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds were soaked in DMEM at a
mass/volume ratio of 5 mg/mL to prepare the extracts. After 24 h of incubation, the
supernatant was collected by centrifugation and sterilized using a 0.22 m ﬁlter (Millipore).
mBMSs were seeded into 96-well plates at a density of 1.5 103cells/well. After 24 h
incubation, the culture medium was replaced with different extracts and incubated for 1, 3
and 7 days. The medium was changed every two days, and the DMEM without scaffolds
immersion was used as the control group. At every time point, the culture medium was
removed, and 200 L of fresh medium containing 10% ( v/v) CCK-8 solution was added and
incubated for 2 h at 37C. A total of 100 L of the medium was transferred to a new 96-well
plate, and the absorbance was measured at 450 nm by a microplate spectrophotometer
(Multiskan FC, Thermo, Waltham, MA, USA). Each group had three parallel samples.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 6 of 22
2.7. The Osteogenic Activity of Composite Hydrogel Scaffolds
2.7.1. Alkaline Phosphatase (ALP) Activity
mBMSCs were seeded in 48-well plates at a density of 1 104cells/well. After 24 h,
the medium was replaced with GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM extracts containing
osteogenic medium (10 nM dexamethasone, 10 mM -glycerolphosphate and 50 ng/mL
ascorbic acid). The osteogenic medium with extracts was used as the control group. The
culture medium was changed every two days. At day 3 and 7, ALP staining was performed
using a BCIP/NBT kit according to the manufacturer’s instruction. In addition, quantitative
analysis of ALP was also detected by AKT assay kit cells according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. The absorbance value was measured at 405 nm using 4-nitrophenol as the
standard. The intracellular total protein content was determined by the BCA kit. Finally,
the ALP activity was normalized to the total protein content. Each group had three
parallel samples.
2.7.2. Alizarin Red Staining and Accumulated Calcium Assay
mBMSCs were seeded in 48-well plates at a density of 1 104cells/well. After 24 h,
the medium was replaced with GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM extracts containing
osteogenic medium (10 nM dexamethasone, 10 mM -glycerolphosphate and 50 ng/mL
ascorbic acid). The osteogenic medium with extracts was used as the control group. The
culture medium was changed every two days. After culturing for 14, 21 and 28 days, cells
were rinsed with PBS, ﬁxed, and incubated with 40 mM alizarin red S (ARS) (Sigma-Aldrich,
Saint Louis, MO, USA) solution for 30 min to stain mineralized nodules. The stained
nodules were observed using a stereoscopic microscope (EZ4HD, Leica, Weztlar, Germany).
The quantitative analysis of ARS staining at day 21 was performed by adding 10% w/v
cetylpyridinium chloride (Sigma-Aldrich, Saint Louis, MO, USA), and the absorbance of
each well was detected at 562 nm.
2.7.3. Osteogenesis-Related Gene Expression
mBMSCs were seeded in 6-well plates at a density of 1 105cells/well. After 24 h,
the medium was replaced with GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM extracts containing
osteogenic medium (10 nM dexamethasone, 10 mM -glycerolphosphate and 50 ng/mL
ascorbic acid). The osteogenic medium with extracts was used as the control group. The
culture medium was changed every two days. After 3, 7 and 14 days, the expression of
osteogenesis-related genes in mBMSCs, including alkaline phosphatase (ALP), aosteopon-
tin (OPN), osteocalcin (OCN), runt-related transcription factor 2 (Runx2) and collagen
typeI(ColI), were analyzed by real-time quantitative polymerase (RT-qPCR). Typically,
total RNA was extracted using a TRIzol ™reagent (Invitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA) and
according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The isolated RNA was reverse-transcribed
into cDNA using a PrimeScript 1st Strand cDNA Synthesis Kit (Takara, Kyoto, Japan).
Afterwards, the expression of osteogenesis-related genes was measured on a Bio-Rad
MyiQ single color RT-qPCR system using a SYBR green PCR kit (Takara, Kyoto, Japan).
The relative expression levels of target genes were calculated by the 2 DDCTformula and
normalized to that of the housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase
(GAPDH). Each group had three parallel samples. The primers used for RT-qPCR are listed
in Table 1.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 7 of 22
Table 1. Prime sequences.
Gene Primer Sequences
ALPForward: 50-TGCCTACTTGTGTGGCGTGAA-30
Reverse: 50-TCACCCGAGTGGTAGTCACAATG-30
OPNForward: 50-TCCAAAGCCAGCCTGGAAC-30
Reverse: 50-TGACCTCAGAAGATGAACTC-30
OCNForward: 50-GCTTGTGACGAGCTATCAGACCAG-30
Reverse: 50-AGCTGCTGTGACATCCATACTTGC-30
Runx2Forward: 50-TCAGCGTCAACACCATCATTC-30
Reverse: 50-CCAGACCAGCAGCACTCCATA-30
COL IForward: 50-AGAACAGCGTGGCCT-30
Reverse: 50-TCCGGTGTGACTCGT-30
FNForward: 50-ATGTGGACCCCTCCTGATAGT-30
Reverse: 50-GCCCAGTGATTTCAGCAAAGG-30
GAPDHForward: 50-TGTGTCCGTCGTGGATCTG-30
Reverse: 50-TTGCTGTTGAAGTCGCAGGA-30
2.8. 3D Bioprinting of Cell-Laden Scaffolds
The inks prepared above were further used to prepare bio-inks by mixing with the
cell suspension. The cell density in bio-inks was 1 107cells/mL. In order to improve the
biological activity of the scaffold, BMP-2 and PDGF were added into the bio-inks with a
ﬁnal concentration of 5 ug/mL and 100 ng/mL, respectively. Before printing, the working
area was ﬁrst sterilized by UV light irradiation. A nozzle with an inner diameter of 400 m
was used, and the bioprinting process was performed after adjusting the appropriate
printing parameters. After printing, the scaffold was transferred to a 4% CaCl 2solution,
cross-linked for 5 min, and then irradiated for 30 s under 365 nm UV light. Then, the
scaffolds were washed with PBS containing 2% penicillin–streptomycin three times and
ﬁnally replaced with fresh culture medium. Three groups of cell-laden scaffolds were
prepared, and according to the different growth factors in the bio-inks, they were labeled
as follows: mBMSCs group, mBMSCs/BMP2 group and mBMSCs/PDGF group.
2.9. Cell Viability, Proliferation and Differentiation
The cell-laden scaffolds were incubated in culture medium, and the medium was
changed every two days. The scaffolds used for cell viability assay were printed in a
dimension of 10 mm 10 mm with two layers. After culturing for 1 and 3 days, cell
viability in the cell-laden scaffolds was assessed using a Live-Death Staining Kit according
to the manufacturer’s instructions. The live/dead cells were observed by a confocal
microscope (Leica, TCSSP8, Germany). At 1, 3 and 5 days, cell proliferation in the cell-laden
scaffolds (10 mm10 mm, 4 layers) was assessed by CCK8. The absorbance values were
measured at 450 nm, with three parallel samples.
For ALP activity assay, the cell-laden scaffolds (10 mm 10 mm, 4 layers) were printed.
After culturing for 3, 7 and 10 days, the scaffolds were crushed evenly; then, 200 L of 1%
Triton X-100 was added to each well and lysed at 4C for 30 min. After centrifugation, the
supernatant was taken for ALP quantiﬁcation, and the total protein amount was calculated
according to the methods in Section 2.6.1.
For RT-qPCR analysis, the cell-laden scaffolds (10 mm 10 mm, 10 layers) were
printed and cultured in a 12-well plate. At days 7 and 14, the scaffolds were crushed, and
the total RNA was extracted using the TRIzol method. The expressions of osteogenesis-
related genes (OPN, CCN and Runx2) and the key gene (Fibronectin, FN) linked to soft
tissue repair were analyzed by RT-qPCR. The steps of reverse transcription and PCR
reaction are as speciﬁed in Section 2.7.3.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 8 of 22
2.10. In Vivo Experiment
2.10.1. Surgical Procedure
Three adult male beagles (average weight = 12–19 kg, 12–15 months) were used
for the in vivo experiments. All animal experimental protocols were approved by the
Animal Research Committee of Guangzhou Longgui Xingke animal farm (XK19011018,
date: 3 December 2019) and were in compliance with the instructions of Institutional
Animal Care and Use Committee (IACUC) guidelines.
The periodontal defect model was established as follows: general anesthesia was
administered to beagle dogs with pentobarbital at a dose of 30 mg/kg, and local inﬁl-
tration anesthesia of the operative area was achieved with atticaine containing 1:100,000
norepinephrine. After successful anesthesia, periodontal evaluation, including probing
depth (PD) and bleeding index (BI), was performed ﬁrst. Then, in a lateral position, an
opener was placed, and a ﬂap procedure was performed in the mandibular premolar region
of the beagle dogs. A buccal periodontal defect of 5 mm 5 mm (widthdepth) was
made on 1/3 of the root of the third and fourth mandibular premolars on both sides with
a dental drill. The scaffolds were divided into four groups: (1) non-implanted scaffold
(blank group), (2) GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold (scaffold group), (3) GelMA/SA/BGM scaf-
fold containing BMP2 and PDGF (BMP2/PDGF group), (4) cell-laden GelMA/SA/BGM
scaffold containing BMP2 and PDGF (mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group); they were then
appropriately sized and placed at the defect sites. The wound was alternately washed with
normal saline and gentamicin and then reset and sutured. Penicillin (4 104IU/kg) was
injected intramuscularly for 3 days to prevent infection.
2.10.2. Micro-CT Assessment of Osteogenic Behavior around Implants
Eight weeks after the operation, periodontal evaluation was performed, including
periodontal probing depth (PD) and gingival bleeding index (BI). Then, the beagles were
executed with pentobarbital overdose. Bilateral mandibular samples (premolar to ﬁrst
molar area) were collected and ﬁxed in 4% paraformaldehyde at room temperature for 48 h.
Samples were ﬁxed on the camera and scanned one by one with Micro-CT (SKYSCAN1172,
Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany). The rate of newborn bone height (Regeneration height per
original defect height, RH/ODH), number of the new bone trabecular mass (trabecular
number, Tb.N), and proportion of newborn bone volume to total volume (bone volume
per total volume, BV/TV) were calculated and analyzed by NRecon and CTAn software
(Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany).
2.10.3. Histological Evaluation and Histomorphometric Measurement
The samples were removed from the ﬁxation solution, washed overnight with tap
water, then dehydrated with gradient ethanol, followed by embedding with photocurable
resin (T7200 resin embedding agent). After the resin curing was completed, the tissue
sections were cut by a hard tissue slicer in the direction of the buccal tongue; the thickness
of the sections was 100 m. After polishing, HE staining and toluidine blue staining
were performed according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Finally, the gingiva and
new bone regeneration in the periodontal defect area were observed using a microscope
(Olympus DP74, Tokyo, Japan). The histomorphological analysis was performed using a
modiﬁed method, as described in the previous literature [ 32,33]. Speciﬁcally, the ratio of
new bone height and new bone area to initial bone defect height and bone defect area were
examined. Height measurements were initiated from the bottom of the bone defect, serving
as the boundary, and were executed using image J 1.53e software. The quantiﬁcation of
the original bone defect area and regenerated bone area was accomplished by cropping
various regions of the micrograph. The total height and area of the newly generated bone
in each photomicrograph were determined by the total color pixels of each image. These
measurements were subsequently divided by the total area of bone defect or total height
pixels to derive the fraction.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 9 of 22
2.11. Statistical Analysis
All data were expressed as means standard deviations. Statistical analysis was
realized using SPSS version 16.0 (Statistical Package, Chicago, USA). One-way ANOVA was
performed to discern the differences between groups. A value of p< 0.05 was considered
to be statistically signiﬁcant.
3. Results
3.1. Physicochemical Characterization of 3D-Printed Scaffolds
As shown in Figure 2A, both of the lyophilized scaffolds possessed a connected pore
structure along the depositional direction and a similar pore size. A relatively intact
ﬁlament structure was observed in the GelMA/SA scaffold, while a large number of small
pores existed in the ﬁlaments of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. At high magniﬁcation,
the GelMA/SA scaffold showed a relatively smooth surface, while the GelMA/SA/BGM
scaffold demonstrated a rough surface, with BGM particles uniformly encapsulated in the
matrix. Additionally, the results of EDS analysis demonstrated the increased characteristic
peaks of Si, Ca and P in the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold, indicating that the BGM was
successfully embedded in the matrix of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold.
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 9 of 22 
 
2.11. Statistical Analysis 
All data were expressed as means ± standard deviations. Statistical analysis was re-
alized using SPSS version 16.0 (Statistical Package, Chicago, USA). One-way ANOVA was performed to discern the differences between groups. A value of p < 0.05 was considered 
to be statistically significant. 
3. Results 
3.1. Physicochemical Characteri zation of 3D-Printed Scaffolds 
As shown in Figure 2A, both of the lyop hilized scaffolds possessed a connected pore 
structure along the depositional direction and a similar pore size. A relatively intact fila-
ment structure was observed in the GelMA/SA  scaffold, while a large number of small 
pores existed in the filaments of the GelMA/SA /BGM scaffold. At high magnification, the 
GelMA/SA scaffold showed a relatively smooth surface, while the GelMA/SA/BGM scaf-
fold demonstrated a rough su rface, with BGM particles un iformly encapsulated in the 
matrix. Additionally, the results of EDS analys is demonstrated the increased characteristic 
peaks of Si, Ca and P in the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold, indicating that the BGM was suc-
cessfully embedded in the matrix of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. 
The swelling behavior of the scaffolds was te sted by immersing them in PBS for 24 h. 
As shown in Figure 2B, the absorption wate r content of the GelMA/SA scaffold was sig-
nificantly higher than that of the GelMA/SA /BGM scaffold. The decrease in water absorp-
tion likely resulted from strong interactions between BGM and the GelMA/SA matrix. 
Both scaffolds showed a rapid degradation rate  in the type II collagenase solution. After 
soaking for 48 h, the degradation of the GelMA/SA scaffold was faster than the 
GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold, and the mass remaining in the GelMA/SA scaffold was 21.42%, 
while it was 37.12% for the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold (Figure 2C). 
Figure 2D presents the stress–strain curves of 3D-printed GelMA/SA-based scaffolds. 
The GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold exhibited a lower deformation than the GelMA/SA scaffold when the strain was greater than 5% and showed a deceased elastic modulus with the 
addition of BGM (Figure 2E). 
 
Figure 2. Characterization of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds. ( A) SEM images and EDS
analysis of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds. ( B) Water absorption. ( C) Degradation rate
in the type II collagenase solution. ( D) Stess-stain curving. ( E) compressive modulus. * p< 0.05,
**p< 0.01, *** p< 0.001 vs. GelMA/SA.
The swelling behavior of the scaffolds was tested by immersing them in PBS for
24 h. As shown in Figure 2B, the absorption water content of the GelMA/SA scaffold was
signiﬁcantly higher than that of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. The decrease in water
absorption likely resulted from strong interactions between BGM and the GelMA/SA
matrix. Both scaffolds showed a rapid degradation rate in the type II collagenase solution.
After soaking for 48 h, the degradation of the GelMA/SA scaffold was faster than the
GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold, and the mass remaining in the GelMA/SA scaffold was 21.42%,
while it was 37.12% for the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold (Figure 2C).Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 10 of 22
Figure 2D presents the stress–strain curves of 3D-printed GelMA/SA-based scaffolds.
The GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold exhibited a lower deformation than the GelMA/SA scaffold
when the strain was greater than 5% and showed a deceased elastic modulus with the
addition of BGM (Figure 2E).
Figure 3A shows the SEM images of the scaffolds after immersion in SBF for 3 and
7 days. At day 3, no obvious mineralized deposits were observed on the surface of the
GelMA/SA scaffold, while a small amount of worm-like apatite was deposited on the sur-
face of BGM exposed on the surface of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. After 7 days, a thin
layer of needle-like apatite was deposited on the surface of the GelMA/SA scaffold, while
the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold surface was covered by a thick layer of apatite. The XRD
patterns demonstrated that only the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold showed the characteristic
peaks of hydroxyapatite at day 3, and when immersed in SBF for 7 days, the characteristic
peaks of hydroxyapatite also appeared in the GelMA/SA scaffold (Figure 3B). The in vitro
mineralization experiments indicated that incorporating BGM into GelMA/SA hydrogel
could improve its bioactivity.
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 10 of 22 
 
Figure 2. Characterization of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds. ( A) SEM images and EDS 
analysis of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds. ( B) Water absorption. ( C) Degradation rate 
in the type II collagenase solution. ( D) Stess-stain curving. ( E) compressive modulus. * p < 0.05, ** p 
< 0.01, *** p < 0.001 vs. GelMA/SA. 
Figure 3A shows the SEM images of the scaffolds after immersion in SBF for 3 and 7 
days. At day 3, no obvious mineralized depo sits were observed on the surface of the 
GelMA/SA scaffold, while a small amount of worm-like apatite was deposited on the sur-face of BGM exposed on the surface of the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold. After 7 days, a thin 
layer of needle-like apatite was deposited on the surface of the GelMA/SA scaffold, while 
the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold surface was covered by a thick layer of apatite. The XRD 
patterns demonstrated that only the GelMA/ SA/BGM scaffold showed the characteristic 
peaks of hydroxyapatite at day 3, and when i mmersed in SBF for 7 days, the characteristic 
peaks of hydroxyapatite also appeared in the GelMA/SA scaffold (Figure 3B). The in vitro 
mineralization experiments indicated that incorporating BGM into GelMA/SA hydrogel 
could improve its bioactivity. 
 
Figure 3. (A) SEM images and ( B) XRD patterns of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM after immersing 
in SBF for 3 and 7 days.  
3.2. Characterization of Biocompatibility and Os teogenic Properties of 3D-Printed Composite 
Hydrogel Scaffolds 
The viability of mBMSCs on the 3D-printed composite hydrogel scaffolds was eval-
uated by a live/dead assay. As shown in Figure 4A, live cells (green) adhered to the sur-
faces of the scaffolds, and no dead cells (red ) were observed. Moreover, the number of live 
cells increased with time. SEM images showed that the cells displayed good spreading 
morphology and obvious pseudopodia at day 1, and after 3 days, both scaffolds were covered with cells. The cell proliferation assay showed that the OD values of each group 
increased with time and had no significant difference at days 1, 4 and 7. Regarding the 
results of live/dead straining, SEM and CCK-8 assays indicated the good biocompatibility 
of 3D-printed GelMA/SA-based composite scaffolds. 
Figure 3. (A) SEM images and ( B) XRD patterns of GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM after immersing
in SBF for 3 and 7 days.
3.2. Characterization of Biocompatibility and Osteogenic Properties of 3D-Printed Composite
Hydrogel Scaffolds
The viability of mBMSCs on the 3D-printed composite hydrogel scaffolds was evalu-
ated by a live/dead assay. As shown in Figure 4A, live cells (green) adhered to the surfaces
of the scaffolds, and no dead cells (red) were observed. Moreover, the number of live
cells increased with time. SEM images showed that the cells displayed good spreading
morphology and obvious pseudopodia at day 1, and after 3 days, both scaffolds were
covered with cells. The cell proliferation assay showed that the OD values of each group
increased with time and had no signiﬁcant difference at days 1, 4 and 7. Regarding the
results of live/dead straining, SEM and CCK-8 assays indicated the good biocompatibility
of 3D-printed GelMA/SA-based composite scaffolds.
The extract was used to evaluate the capacity of the scaffolds to induce the osteogenic
differentiation of mBMSCs by characterizing the ALP activity, calcium nodule deposition
and the expression of osteogenic-related genes.
For ALP staining in Figure 4D, all groups appeared to be light purple, and the dif-
ference between the groups was not obvious at day 3. After 7 days, the staining of the
experimental groups was darker than that of the control group, and the GelMA/SA/BGM
group showed the deepest staining, suggesting an enhanced ALP activity of mBMSCs in
the presence of BGM. The result of ALP quantitative analysis was consistent with the result
of ALP staining.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 11 of 22
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 11 of 22 
 
 
Figure 4. In vitro biocompatibility and osteogenesis evaluation of mBMSCs after culturing with 
GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM. ( A) Live/dead cell staining. ( B) Cell morphology observation. ( C) 
Cell proliferation viability. ( D) ALP staining and quantitative an alysis of mBMSCs incubated with 
extracts for 3 and 7 days. ( E) Alizarin red staining and quantita tive analysis of mBMSCs incubated 
with extracts at different time points. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA. 
The extract was used to evaluate the capacity  of the scaffolds to induce the osteogenic 
differentiation of mBMSCs by characterizing the ALP activity, calcium nodule deposition 
and the expression of osteogenic-related genes. 
For ALP staining in Figure 4D, all groups a ppeared to be light purple, and the differ-
ence between the groups was not obvious at da y 3. After 7 days, the staining of the exper-
imental groups was darker than that of the control group, and the GelMA/SA/BGM group 
showed the deepest staining, suggesting an enhanced ALP activity of mBMSCs in the 
presence of BGM. The result of ALP quantitative analysis was consistent with the result 
of ALP staining. 
For alizarin red staining, after culturing for 14 days, only a few mineralized nodules 
appeared in each group. When cultured for 21 and 28 days, more mineralized nodules 
were observed in the groups with extracts than the control group, and the 
GelMA/SA/BGM group had the most mineralized nodules (Figure 4D). The quantification 
of alizarin red at day 21 demonstrated a significant increase in calcium deposition in the groups with extracts in compassion with the control group; in particular, calcium deposi-
tion was significantly enhanced in the grou p of GelMA/SA/BGM compared with the other 
two groups (Figure 4E), which was consistent with the staining results. In summary, the 
3D-printed GelMA/SA-based composite scaffo lds can promote the formation of mineral-
ized nodules and osteogenic differentiation of mBMSCs, and an enhanced osteogenic ac-
tivity was achieved after the addition of BGM. 
Figure 4. In vitro biocompatibility and osteogenesis evaluation of mBMSCs after culturing with
GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM. ( A) Live/dead cell staining. ( B) Cell morphology observation.
(C) Cell proliferation viability. ( D) ALP staining and quantitative analysis of mBMSCs incubated with
extracts for 3 and 7 days. ( E) Alizarin red staining and quantitative analysis of mBMSCs incubated
with extracts at different time points. * p< 0.05 vs. control;#p< 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA.
For alizarin red staining, after culturing for 14 days, only a few mineralized nodules
appeared in each group. When cultured for 21 and 28 days, more mineralized nodules were
observed in the groups with extracts than the control group, and the GelMA/SA/BGM
group had the most mineralized nodules (Figure 4D). The quantiﬁcation of alizarin red
at day 21 demonstrated a signiﬁcant increase in calcium deposition in the groups with
extracts in compassion with the control group; in particular, calcium deposition was signiﬁ-
cantly enhanced in the group of GelMA/SA/BGM compared with the other two groups
(Figure 4E), which was consistent with the staining results. In summary, the 3D-printed
GelMA/SA-based composite scaffolds can promote the formation of mineralized nod-
ules and osteogenic differentiation of mBMSCs, and an enhanced osteogenic activity was
achieved after the addition of BGM.
To further prove the inﬂuence of each scaffold on osteogenic differentiation of mBM-
SCs, the osteogenic-related genes OPN, OCN, ALP , Runx2 and COL I were analyzed and
are shown in Figure 5. At day 4, the expression of OCN, OPN and ALP in the GelMA/SA
and GelMA/SA/BGM groups were upregulated compared to the control group, and there
was no signiﬁcant difference for Runx2 and COL I in the three groups. Among them, both
the GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM groups could signiﬁcantly enhance the expression
of OPN. Compared with the control group, only the GelMA/SA/BG group showed a
statistical difference in the expression of OCN and ALP . At day 7, compared with the
control group, GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM groups could signiﬁcantly upregulate
the expression of OCN, OPN, Runx2, COL I and ALP , except for the Runx2 expression of
GelMA/SA group. At day 14, there was no signiﬁcant difference in the expression of OCN,Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 12 of 22
ALP and COL I. Compared with the control group, the expression of OPN and Runx2 were
signiﬁcantly upregulated in both GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM groups, and the gene
expression in the GelMA/SA/BGM group was much higher than in the GelMA/SA group.
In summary, the effect of the scaffolds in promoting the expression of osteogenesis-related
genes was as follows: GelMA/SA/BGM group > GelMA/SA group > control group, in
which the GelMA/SA/BGM group showed the best promoting effect.
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 12 of 22 
 
To further prove the influence of each scaf fold on osteogenic differentiation of mBM-
SCs, the osteogenic-related genes OPN, OCN,  ALP, Runx2 and COL I were analyzed and 
are shown in Figure 5. At day 4, the expression of OCN, OPN and ALP in the GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM groups were upregulated compared to the control group, and there 
was no significant difference for Runx2 and CO L I in the three groups. Among them, both 
the GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM groups co uld significantly enhance the expression 
of OPN. Compared with the control group, only the GelMA/SA/BG group showed a sta-
tistical difference in the expression of OCN and ALP. At day 7, compared with the control group, GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA /BGM groups could significantly upregulate the expres-
sion of OCN, OPN, Runx2, COL I and ALP, except for the Runx2 expression of GelMA/SA 
group. At day 14, there was no significant di fference in the expression of OCN, ALP and 
COL I. Compared with the control group, th e expression of OPN and Runx2 were signif-
icantly upregulated in both GelMA/SA an d GelMA/SA/BGM groups, and the gene ex-
pression in the GelMA/SA/BGM group was much higher than in the GelMA/SA group. In 
summary, the effect of the scaffolds in promot ing the expression of osteogenesis-related 
genes was as follows: GelMA/SA/BGM group > GelMA/SA group > control group, in which the GelMA/SA/BGM group showed the best promoting effect. 
 
Figure 5. The osteogenic gene expressi on (ALP, COL1, OCN, OPN and Runx2) of mBMSCs after 
culturing with extracts for 4, 7 and 14 days. * p < 0.05 vs. control; # p < 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA. 
  
Figure 5. The osteogenic gene expression (ALP , COL1, OCN, OPN and Runx2) of mBMSCs after
culturing with extracts for 4, 7 and 14 days. * p< 0.05 vs. control;#p< 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA.
3.3. The Viability, Proliferation, and Related-Gene Expression of Osteogenic Differentiation and
Soft Tissue Repair of mBMSCs in 3D-Bioprinted Cell- and Growth Factor-Laden Scaffolds
After 3D bioprinting, the cell- and growth factor-laden scaffolds were incubated in
culture medium for 1 and 3 days, and live/dead cell staining was used to evaluate cell
viability in 3D-printed scaffolds. The results showed that mBMSCs encapsulated in the
scaffolds exhibited good cell vitality, and the number increased over time (Figure 6A),
which is also conﬁrmed by the CCK-8 test. The BMP2- and PDGF-loaded scaffolds could
considerably increase cell proliferation at days 3 and 5 when compared to the scaffold
devoid of growth factors (Figure 6B), indicating that BMP2 and PDGF could promote the
proliferation of mBMSCs. Furthermore, the ALP activity of mBMSCs in 3D-bioprinted
scaffolds at days 3, 7 and 10 is shown in Figure 6C. There was no signiﬁcant difference
in ALP activity among the three groups after an incubation of 3 days. mBMSCs/BMP2
and mBMSCs/PDGF scaffolds exhibited a signiﬁcantly enhanced ALP activity at day 7 in
comparison to the mBMSCs scaffold, and the cell-laden scaffold with BMP2 showed the
highest ALP activity. A signiﬁcant increase in ALP activity in the mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffoldBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 13 of 22
was observed at day 10 when compared to the mBMSCs/PDGF and mBMSCs scaffolds.
Therefore, incorporation of BMP2 into the cell-laden scaffold was more conducive to ALP
activity expression.
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 13 of 22 
 
3.3. The Viability, Proliferation, and Related-Gene  Expression of  Osteogenic Differentiation and 
Soft Tissue Repair of mBMSCs in 3D-Bioprinted Cell- and Gr owth Factor-Laden Scaffolds 
After 3D bioprinting, the cell- and growth factor-laden scaffolds were incubated in 
culture medium for 1 and 3 days, and live/dead cell staining was used to evaluate cell 
viability in 3D-printed scaffolds. The result s showed that mBMSCs encapsulated in the 
scaffolds exhibited good cell vitality, and th e number increased over time (Figure 6A), 
which is also confirmed by the CCK-8 test. The BMP2- and PDGF-loaded scaffolds could 
considerably increase cell proliferation at days 3 and 5 when compared to the scaffold devoid of growth factors (Figure 6B), indicating that BMP2 and PDGF could promote the 
proliferation of mBMSCs. Furthermore, the ALP activity of mBMSCs in 3D-bioprinted 
scaffolds at days 3, 7 and 10 is shown in Figure 6C. There was no significant difference in ALP activity among the three groups after an incubation of 3 days. mBMSCs/BMP2 and 
mBMSCs/PDGF scaffolds exhibited a significantly enhanced ALP activity at day 7 in com-
parison to the mBMSCs scaffold, and the cell-l aden scaffold with BMP2 showed the high-
est ALP activity. A significant increase in ALP activity in the mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold was 
observed at day 10 when compared to the mBMSCs/PDGF and mBMSCs  scaffolds. There-
fore, incorporation of BMP2 into the cell-lad en scaffold was more conducive to ALP ac-
tivity expression. 
 
Figure 6. Cell viability, proliferation and ALP activi ty evaluation of mBMSCs encapsulated in 
GelMA/SA/BGM hydrogel after 3D bioprinting. ( A) Live/dead cell staining. ( B) Cell proliferation. 
(C) ALP activity. * p < 0.05 vs. control, # p < 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA. 
The capacity of the 3D-bioprinted scaffolds to promote osteogenic differentiation and 
soft tissue repair was evaluated by examin ing the expression of osteogenesis-related 
(OPN, OCN and Runx2) and soft tissue-related (FN) markers. As shown in Figure 7, com-
pared with the cell-laden scaffold without growth factors (control group), cell- and growth 
factor-loaded scaffolds could promote the expression of OCN, OPN, Runx2 and FN, and significant differences were observed, exce pt for Runx2 in the mBMSCs/PDGF group at 
days 7 and 14. The mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold exhibited the most pronounced expression of 
genes related to osteogenesis. At day 7, the expression of FN in the mBMSCs/PDGF scaf-
fold was significantly higher than that observed in mBMSCs/BMP2 and mBMSCs 
Figure 6. Cell viability, proliferation and ALP activity evaluation of mBMSCs encapsulated in
GelMA/SA/BGM hydrogel after 3D bioprinting. ( A) Live/dead cell staining. ( B) Cell proliferation.
(C) ALP activity. * p< 0.05 vs. control,#p< 0.05 vs. GelMA/SA.
The capacity of the 3D-bioprinted scaffolds to promote osteogenic differentiation
and soft tissue repair was evaluated by examining the expression of osteogenesis-related
(OPN, OCN and Runx2) and soft tissue-related (FN) markers. As shown in Figure 7,
compared with the cell-laden scaffold without growth factors (control group), cell- and
growth factor-loaded scaffolds could promote the expression of OCN, OPN, Runx2 and FN,
and signiﬁcant differences were observed, except for Runx2 in the mBMSCs/PDGF group
at days 7 and 14. The mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold exhibited the most pronounced expression
of genes related to osteogenesis. At day 7, the expression of FN in the mBMSCs/PDGF
scaffold was signiﬁcantly higher than that observed in mBMSCs/BMP2 and mBMSCs
scaffolds; the expression of FN in the mBMSCs/PDGF and mBMSCs/BMP scaffolds was
comparable, and both signiﬁcantly differed for the control group at day 14. In summary,
the mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold and mBMSCs/PDGF scaffold could signiﬁcantly promote the
expression of genes related to osteogenesis soft tissue, respectively.
3.4. In Vivo Periodontal Repair Experiment
In order to examine the periodontal regeneration potential of 3D-bioprinted composite
hydrogel scaffolds in vivo , three distinct groups of scaffolds were utilized, namely the
GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold group (scaffold group), the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold with
BMP2 and PDGF group (BMP2/PDGF group) and the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold with
BMP2, PDGF and mBMSCs group (mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group). These scaffolds were
implanted into the periodontal defect model of beagle dogs, while the blank control group
(blank group) received no treatment. The surgical procedures involved in the creation
of the periodontal defect model and scaffold implantation are illustrated in Figure 8A.
After 8 weeks of implantation, all beagle dogs were in good condition without infection,
necrosis or wound exposure (Figure 8B). The results of periodontal examination showed an
increase in DPD value in BMP2/PDGF and mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF groups as comparedBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 14 of 22
with the blank group and scaffold group, with no signiﬁcant difference (Figure 8C). These
ﬁndings suggest that the 3D-bioprinted cell-laden scaffold containing BMP2 and PDGF
may facilitate the healing of gingival tissue to some extent.
Figure 7. The expression of OPN, OCN, Runx2 and FN of mBMSCs in 3D-bioprinted scaffolds after
culturing for 7 and 14 days. * p< 0.05 vs. mBMSCs scaffold,#p< 0.05 vs. mBMSCs/BMP scaffold.
The regeneration of the buccal alveolar bone plate was evaluated using the buccol-
ingual three-dimensional reconstruction of the periodontal model using CTvox software
(Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany). After being treated with 3D-bioprinted scaffolds, the ex-
periment groups exhibited obvious newly formed bone, as depicted in Figure 9A. In
addition, the RH/ODH, Tb.N and BV/TV of the experiment groups on one-, two- and
three-dimensional scales signiﬁcantly increased when compared with the blank group,
with the mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group exhibiting the highest increase, followed by the
BMP/PDGF group, scaffold group and control group. The results showed that mBMSCs
and growth factor-laden 3D-bioprinted scaffolds can obviously promote the reconstruction
of periodontal tissue.
HE staining results indicated that the scaffolds of all the experimental groups were
completely decomposed, and newly formed gingiva and bone tissue were observed in all
the experimental groups. In contrast, the blank group was characterized by the hyperplasia
of ﬁbrous connective tissue. Notably, the mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group exhibited the best
effect on the repair of gum and bone tissue as compared to the other groups (Figure 10A).
The results of toluidine blue staining were consistent with those of HE (Figure 10B). Com-
pared with the blank group, the area and height of the new bone in the experimental
groups were signiﬁcantly improved, and the repair effect of the scaffold containing cells
and growth factors was more obvious (Figure 10C,D). These results further conﬁrmed the
potential of 3D-bioprinted composite scaffolds with cells and growth factors to regenerate
periodontal tissue.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 15 of 22
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 15 of 22 
 
 
Figure 8. (A) Construction of acute periodontal defect in  beagle dogs, (a) preoperative photograph, 
(b) periodontal examination, (c) flap, (d) construc tion of 5 mm × 5 mm bone defect, (e) scaffold im-
plantation, (f) suture. ( B) Intraoral photographs at 8 weeks afte r surgery. (a): (1) blank group, (2) 
scaffold group; (b): (3) BMP2/PDGF gr oup, (4) mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group. ( C) Periodontal status 
at 8 weeks after surgery. 
The regeneration of the buccal alveolar bone plate was evaluated using the buccolin-
gual three-dimensional reconstruction of the periodontal model using CTvox software 
(Bruker, Karlsruhe, Germany). After being tr eated with 3D-bioprinted scaffolds, the ex-
periment groups exhibited obvi ous newly formed bone, as depicted in Figure 9A. In ad-
dition, the RH/ODH, Tb.N and BV/TV of the ex periment groups on one-, two- and three-
dimensional scales significantly increased when  compared with the blank group, with the 
mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group exhi biting the highest increase , followed by the BMP/PDGF 
group, scaffold group and control group. Th e results showed that mBMSCs and growth 
factor-laden 3D-bioprinted scaffolds can obvi ously promote the reconstruction of perio-
dontal tissue. 
Figure 8. (A) Construction of acute periodontal defect in beagle dogs, (a) preoperative photograph,
(b) periodontal examination, (c) ﬂap, (d) construction of 5 mm 5 mm bone defect, (e) scaffold
implantation, (f) suture. ( B) Intraoral photographs at 8 weeks after surgery. (a): (1) blank group, (2)
scaffold group; (b): (3) BMP2/PDGF group, (4) mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group. ( C) Periodontal status
at 8 weeks after surgery.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 16 of 22
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 16 of 22 
 
 
Figure 9. (A) Buccal-lingual micro-CT reconstruction 8 weeks after surgery. ( B) Micro-CT analysis: 
(a) RH/ODH, (b) 2D analysis of BV/TV, (c) 2D anal ysis of Tb.N, (d) 3D analysis of BV/TV, (e) 3D 
analysis of Tb.N. * p < 0.05 vs. blank group, # p < 0.05 vs. scaffold group, @ p < 0.05 vs. BMP2/PDGF 
group. 
HE staining results indicated that the scaffolds of all the experimental groups were 
completely decomposed, and newly formed ging iva and bone tissue were observed in all 
the experimental groups. In contrast, the blank group was characterized by the hyper-
plasia of fibrous connective tissue. Notabl y, the mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group exhibited 
the best effect on the repair of gum and bone tissue as compared to the other groups (Fig-
ure 10A). The results of toluidine blue staining were consistent with those of HE (Figure 
10B). Compared with the blank group, the area and height of the new bone in the experi-
mental groups were significantly improved, and the repair effect of the scaffold contain-ing cells and growth factors was more obvious (Figure 10C,D). These results further con-
firmed the potential of 3D-bioprinted composite scaffolds with cells and growth factors to 
regenerate periodontal tissue. 
a b 
c d 
e 
Figure 9. (A) Buccal-lingual micro-CT reconstruction 8 weeks after surgery. ( B) Micro-CT analy-
sis: (a) RH/ODH, (b) 2D analysis of BV/TV , (c) 2D analysis of Tb.N, (d) 3D analysis of BV/TV ,
(e) 3D analysis of Tb.N. * p< 0.05 vs. blank group,#p< 0.05 vs. scaffold group,@p< 0.05 vs.
BMP2/PDGF group.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 17 of 22
Biomolecules 2023 , 13, x FOR PEER REVIEW 17 of 22 
 
 
Figure 10. Histological evaluation and histomorphometri c analysis of the periodontal tissue regen-
eration at 8 weeks after surgery. ( A) H&E staining. ( B) TB staining. (NB: new bone; RT: root; G: 
gingiva). ( C) Ratio of new bone area to total bone defect area. ( D) Ratio of new bone height to total 
bone defect height. * p < 0.05 vs. blank group, # p < 0.05 vs. scaffold group, @ p < 0.05 vs. BMP2/PDGF 
group. 
4. Discussion 
The ideal periodontal repair should involve restoring both soft and hard periodontal 
tissues. Although tissue engineering techniqu es exhibit potential in regenerating perio-
dontal tissues, the lack of appropriate scaffo ld materials has hindered the attainment of 
this objective. Nevertheless, recent advancem ents in 3D printing technology have facili-
tated the production of scaffolds with complex structures. This technique not only enables 
personalized restorations but also simulates the microenvironment of tissues and organs, 
providing an optimal environment for cell grow th and extracellular matrix formation [34–
36]. With the development of 3D printing te chnology and biomaterials, 3D bioprinting of 
cell-laden composite hydrogel scaffolds has become a new direction for periodontal tissue 
regeneration. This novel biomanufacturing tec hnology enables the precise construction of 
cells and cell encapsulation materials [37]. To achieve successful 3D bioprinting, bio-inks 
aimed at preserving the cellular ph enotype and function are required. 
GelMA, a hydrogel material synthesized through chemical polymerization of gelatin 
and MA, exhibits a structure similar to na tural ECM and possesses favorable biocompat-
ibility and biodegradability [38]. SA is a commonly employed hydrogel material in bi-
oprinting due to its high viscosity and relatively simple cross-linking mechanism [39,40]. 
However, the surface structure of SA is not conducive to ce ll adhesion, necessitating the 
incorporation of other biomolecules to enha nce cell adhesion [10]. Although the compo-
site hydrogel consisting of GelMA and SA  exhibits favorable biocompatibility and 
Figure 10. Histological evaluation and histomorphometric analysis of the periodontal tissue regenera-
tion at 8 weeks after surgery. ( A) H&E staining. ( B) TB staining. (NB: new bone; RT: root; G: gingiva).
(C) Ratio of new bone area to total bone defect area. ( D) Ratio of new bone height to total bone defect
height. * p< 0.05 vs. blank group,#p< 0.05 vs. scaffold group,@p< 0.05 vs. BMP2/PDGF group.
4. Discussion
The ideal periodontal repair should involve restoring both soft and hard periodontal
tissues. Although tissue engineering techniques exhibit potential in regenerating periodon-
tal tissues, the lack of appropriate scaffold materials has hindered the attainment of this
objective. Nevertheless, recent advancements in 3D printing technology have facilitated the
production of scaffolds with complex structures. This technique not only enables personal-
ized restorations but also simulates the microenvironment of tissues and organs, providing
an optimal environment for cell growth and extracellular matrix formation [34–36] . With
the development of 3D printing technology and biomaterials, 3D bioprinting of cell-laden
composite hydrogel scaffolds has become a new direction for periodontal tissue regenera-
tion. This novel biomanufacturing technology enables the precise construction of cells and
cell encapsulation materials [ 37]. To achieve successful 3D bioprinting, bio-inks aimed at
preserving the cellular phenotype and function are required.
GelMA, a hydrogel material synthesized through chemical polymerization of gelatin
and MA, exhibits a structure similar to natural ECM and possesses favorable biocom-
patibility and biodegradability [ 38]. SA is a commonly employed hydrogel material in
bioprinting due to its high viscosity and relatively simple cross-linking mechanism [ 39,40].
However, the surface structure of SA is not conducive to cell adhesion, necessitating the
incorporation of other biomolecules to enhance cell adhesion [ 10]. Although the composite
hydrogel consisting of GelMA and SA exhibits favorable biocompatibility and printability,
its application in bone tissue engineering remains restricted due to the absence of biolog-Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 18 of 22
ical activity. To enhance the bioactivity of the composite hydrogel, BGM is commonly
employed as a bioactive agent, owing to its unique biological properties, particularly its
capacity to stimulate osteogenesis and angiogenesis [ 41]. In this study, a multi-component
hydrogel was successfully synthesized by combining inorganic bioactive particles (BGM)
and a polymer matrix (GelMA and SA), which was then processed into GelMA/SA/BGM
composite hydrogel scaffolds by 3D printing technology. The physicochemical character-
istics and in vitro osteogenic ability of the scaffolds were evaluated. Subsequently, the
GelMA/SA/BGM composite hydrogel was explored as a bio-ink for the fabrication of
cell and growth factor (BMP2 and PDGF)-laden scaffolds using 3D bioprinting for the
regeneration of periodontal tissue.
The regular arrangement of pore structure with similar pore size was observed in
GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM 3D-printed scaffolds. Elemental analysis revealed the
presence of Ca, Si and P in the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold due to the addition of BGM
particles, while the GelMA/SA scaffold also contained Ca, potentially resulting from the
cross-linking of CaCl 2with SA. Both GelMA/SA and GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds exhibited
high water content, facilitating nutrient and metabolite ﬂow and transportation, and creat-
ing a favorable microenvironment for tissue regeneration and repair. The GelMA/SA/BGM
scaffold exhibited a slightly lower water content compared to the GelMA/SA scaffold. This
can be attributed to the potential interaction between the Ca ions dissolved from BGM
and the carboxyl groups of GelMA, leading to a decrease in the binding capacity of the
GelMA and water molecules [ 28]. Additionally, the uniform dispersion of BGM within
the scaffolds resulted in a decreased binding rate of water molecules to GelMA and SA,
ultimately contributing to the reduction in water content. The degradation rate of the two
scaffolds in the presence of type II collagenase exhibited an initial rapid decline followed by
a gradual decrease, with the scaffold containing BGM demonstrating a slower degradation
rate. This phenomenon may be attributed to the superior water absorption capacity of the
GelMA/SA scaffold compared to the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold, which facilitated rapid
adsorption of the type II collagenase solution and subsequent degradation. Consequently,
the incorporation of BGM into the GelMA/SA scaffold resulted in a marked improvement
in the stability of the hydrogel system. The mechanical testing results indicated a reduction
in compression modulus upon the inclusion of BGM, attributable to the presence of BGM
impeding the interaction of GelMA molecules activated by PI-2959. The ability to induce
apatite formation in vitro may indirectly reﬂect the in vivo osseointegration ability of bio-
materials [ 42]. The biomineralization assay conducted in vitro demonstrated the formation
of a layer of apatite on the GelMA/SA/BGM scaffold surface, signifying the favorable
bioactivity of this composite material system, suitable for the fabrication of bone tissue
engineering scaffolds. The GelMA/SA-based scaffolds exhibited good biocompatibility
and cell viability. The incorporation of BGM into the scaffold resulted in enhanced cell
adhesion, proliferation, ALP activity, calcium nodule formation and the promotion of
osteogenesis-related gene expression. The improvement of the biological performance of
the BGM-loaded scaffold can be attributed to the bioactive ions (Si, Ca and P) released
from BGM, which have been shown to promote the osteogenesis and angiogenesis of
mesenchymal stem cells in many studies [43,44].
Based on the above experimental results, the composite hydrogel composed of GelMA,
SA and BGM presented great potential as a bio-ink for 3D bioprinting of cell-laden scaffolds.
Both BMP2 and PDGF are growth factors that are associated with regenerative repair of
maxillofacial tissues, and they are capable of recruiting mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs).
BMP2 primarily induces bone regeneration by promoting the differentiation of MSCs
into osteoblasts [ 45,46]. On the other hand, PDGF is a potent chemotactic agent that can
attract MSCs, ﬁbroblasts, repair proteins, and other factors, thereby promoting soft tissue
regeneration [ 47]. Consequently, we developed a scaffold laden with mBMSCs, BMP2, and
PDGF via 3D bioprinting to address the repair of the defects resulting from periodontal
disease. The utilization of PDGF-B facilitates the restoration of gingival tissue, whereas
BMP2 expedites the generation of fresh osseous tissue. Our investigation involved in vitroBiomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 19 of 22
and in vivo experiments to evaluate the scaffold’s efﬁcacy for bone and soft tissue repair,
with potential applications for personalized tissue defect therapy.
Natural polymer hydrogels, such as GelMA and SA, exhibit favorable biocompatibility
and low cytotoxicity, rendering them suitable carriers for delivering diverse biomolecules,
including living cells [ 48]. Bioactive glass is classiﬁed as a type of bioactive material
that possesses favorable biocompatibility and osteoinductivity [ 41]. Therefore, the 3D
bioprinted GelMA/SA/BGM scaffolds with cells and growth factors exhibited favorable
cell viability and proliferation activity. The ALP activity of the scaffold was enhanced after
the addition of BMP2. OCN, OPN and Runx2 are markers for different stages of bone
matrix mineralization and osteogenic differentiation. FN, as one of the components of the
extracellular matrix, promotes ﬁbroblast migration [ 49] and is thus considered a marker for
soft tissue repair. RT-qPCR results showed that the mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold exhibited a
greater capacity to enhance the expression of OCN, OPN and Runx2 in mBMSCs, while
the mBMSCs/PDGF scaffold demonstrated a superior ability to promote the expression of
FN in mBMSCs. Additionally, the expression of OCN, OPN and FN was observed to be
more pronounced during the initial stage, while Runx2 exhibited greater activity during
later stages.
In vivo , we constructed the mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF scaffold by combining the mBM-
SCs/PDGF scaffold, which promotes soft tissue repair, and the mBMSCs/BMP2 scaffold,
which promotes bone regeneration. The results indicated that postoperative wound heal-
ing was satisfactory, with improvements in DPD and DSI. The mBMSCs/BMP2/PDGF
scaffold exhibited the most signiﬁcant improvement, providing evidence that the mBM-
SCs/BMP2/PDGF scaffold is an effective means of promoting gingival repair. Additionally,
new bone tissue was observed in all groups, with the mMSCs/BMP2/PDGF group exhibit-
ing the most signiﬁcant improvement in buccal alveolar bone height, bone tissue volume,
and bone trabecular number, conﬁrming that adding BMP2 in cell-laden scaffolds can
effectively promote bone formation. Thus, it can be concluded that cell-laden scaffolds in
combination with BMP2 and PDGF can effectively repair periodontal soft and hard tissue
defects when compared with the scaffold only containing BMP2 and PDGF.
Although we successfully established a bio-ink that can be used for 3D bioprinting
and achieved the desired bone and soft tissue regeneration in an in vivo periodontal defect
experiment, the research still has some shortcomings. The low mechanical strength of the
scaffold should be further improved to be more suitable for the repair of periodontal bone
tissue defects. Additionally, an acute trauma model of periodontal tissue was used in this
study, and the repair of periodontal injury caused by periodontal inﬂammation and the
regulation effect of hydrogel on inﬂammation should be carried out in future studies.
5. Conclusions
In this study, we prepared a multi-component hydrogel composed of GelMA, SA and
BGM and fabricated it into a porous scaffold by extrusion-based 3D printing technology;
due to its good biocompatibility and osteogenic activity, the composite hydrogel can be
used as an alternative material to encapsulate cells and growth factors for 3D bioprinting.
The hydrogel’s capacity to be printed was unaffected by the inclusion of cells or growth
factors, and the 3D-bioprinted hydrogel scaffolds were able to mimic the biological effects
of the loaded growth factors. BMP2 and PDGF loaded in the scaffolds may help mBMSCs
differentiate into osteoblasts and improve their capacity to heal soft tissue, respectively.
The dual functional scaffold showed a good potential for periodontal tissue regeneration,
which can facilitate the restoration of the alveolar bone and the healing of gingival tissue in
the periodontal defect model of beagle dogs.
Therefore, this study provides a promising bio-ink for preparing cell-laden 3D bio-
printed scaffolds, and different functional biological factors such as BMP2 or PDGF can be
incorporated into the bio-ink that may have versatile applications in the individualized
therapy of tissue defects.Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 20 of 22
Author Contributions: L.L. and G.M. conducted the experiments and obtained the results. W.L.,
C.M., Y.P ., H.Z. and Q.Z. sorted and analyzed the results. G.M., L.L. and C.M. wrote the draft. G.M.,
L.L., Y.X., X.Y. and G.M. extensively revised, formatted, and submitted versions of the manuscript.
All authors participated in data discussions. All authors have read and agreed to the published
version of the manuscript.
Funding: This work was funded by the Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong Province
(No. 2023A1515012777), the Science and Technology Planning Project of Guangzhou City, China
(No. 202102080227, 202201020203,202201020117) and the Special projects in key ﬁelds of Guangdong
Colleges and Universities, China (No. 2021ZDZX2058).
Institutional Review Board Statement: The study was conducted in accordance with the Declaration
of Helsinki and approved by the Animal Research Committee of Guangzhou Longgui Xingke animal
farm (protocol code XK19011018, 3 December 2019).
Informed Consent Statement: Informed consent was obtained from all subjects involved in the study.
Data Availability Statement: All relevant data of this study are presented. Additional data will be
provided upon request.
Conﬂicts of Interest: The authors declare no conﬂict of interest.
References
1. Zhang, L.; Dong, Y.; Xue, Y.; Shi, J.; Zhang, X.; Liu, Y.; Midgley, A.C.; Wang, S. Multifunctional triple-layered composite scaffolds
combining platelet-rich ﬁbrin promote bone regeneration. ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. 2019 ,5, 6691–6702. [CrossRef]
2. Jamuna-Thevi, K.; Saarani, N.N.; Kadir, M.R.A.; Hermawan, H. Triple-layered PLGA/nanoapatite/lauric acid graded composite
membrane for periodontal guided bone regeneration. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2014 ,43, 253–263. [CrossRef]
3. Sowmya, S.; Mony, U.; Jayachandran, P .; Reshma, S.; Kumar, R.A.; Arzate, H.; Nair, S.V .; Jayakumar, R. Tri-Layered Nanocomposite
Hydrogel Scaffold for the Concurrent Regeneration of Cementum, Periodontal Ligament, and Alveolar Bone. Adv. Heal. Mater.
2017 ,6, 161251. [CrossRef]
4. Pilipchuk, S.P .; Fretwurst, T.; Yu, N.; Larsson, L.; Kavanagh, N.; Asa’Ad, F.; Cheng, K.C.K.; Lahann, J.; Giannobile, W.V .
Micropatterned scaffolds with immobilized growth factor genes regenerate bone and periodontal ligament-like tissues. Adv.
Health Mater. 2018 ,7, e1800750. [CrossRef]
5. Soltani-Dehnavi, S.; Mehdikhani, M.; Raﬁenia, M.; Bonakdar, S. Preparation and in vitro evaluation of polycaprolac-
tone/PEG/bioactive glass nanopowders nanocomposite membranes for GTR/GBR applications. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2018 ,90,
236–247. [CrossRef]
6. Asa’Ad, F.; Pagni, G.; Pilipchuk, S.P .; Giann ì, A.B.; Giannobile, W.V .; Rasperini, G. 3D-printed scaffolds and biomaterials: Review
of alveolar bone augmentation and periodontal regeneration applications. Int. J. Dent. 2016 ,2016 , 1239842. [CrossRef]
7. Dubey, N.; Ferreira, J.A.; Daghrery, A.; Aytac, Z.; Malda, J.; Bhaduri, S.B.; Bottino, M.C. Highly tunable bioactive ﬁber-reinforced
hydrogel for guided bone regeneration. Acta Biomater. 2020 ,113, 164–176. [CrossRef]
8. Wang, C.; Huang, W.; Zhou, Y.; He, L.; He, Z.; Chen, Z.; He, X.; Tian, S.; Liao, J.; Lu, B.; et al. 3D printing of bone tissue engineering
scaffolds. Bioact. Mater. 2020 ,5, 82–91. [CrossRef]
9. Murphy, S.V .; Atala, A. 3D bioprinting of tissues and organs. Nat. Biotechnol. 2014 ,32, 773–785. [CrossRef]
10. Wu, J.; Miao, G.; Zheng, Z.; Li, Z.; Ren, W.; Wu, C.; Li, Y.; Huang, Z.; Yang, L.; Guo, L. 3D printing mesoporous bioactive
glass/sodium alginate/gelatin sustained release scaffolds for bone repair. J. Biomater. Appl. 2019 ,33, 755–765. [CrossRef]
11. Tasnim, N.; De la Vega, L.; Anil Kumar, S.; Abelseth, L.; Alonzo, M.; Amereh, M.; Joddar, B.; Willerth, S.M. 3D bioprinting stem
cell derived tissues. Cell. Mol. Bioeng. 2018 ,11, 219–240. [CrossRef]
12. Aljohani, W.; Ullah, M.W.; Zhang, X.; Yang, G. Bioprinting and its applications in tissue engineering and regenerative medicine.
Int. J. Biol. Macromol. 2017 ,107 Pt A , 261–275. [CrossRef]
13. Yang, X.; Ma, Y.; Wang, X.; Yuan, S.; Huo, F.; Yi, G.; Zhang, J.; Yang, B.; Tian, W. A 3D-bioprinted functional module based on
decellularized extracellular matrix bioink for periodontal regeneration. Adv. Sci. 2023 ,10, 2205041. [CrossRef]
14. Shaikh, M.S.; Zafar, M.S.; Alnazzawi, A.; Javed, F. Nanocrystalline hydroxyapatite in regeneration of periodontal intrabony
defects: A systematic review and meta-analysis. Ann. Anat. 2022 ,240, 151877. [CrossRef]
15. Shaikh, M.S.; Husain, S.; Lone, M.A.; Lone, M.A.; Akhlaq, H.; Zafar, M.S. Clinical effectiveness of anorganic bovine-derived
hydroxyapatite matrix/cell-binding peptide grafts for regeneration of periodontal defects: A systematic review and meta-analysis.
Regen. Med. 2020 ,15, 2379–2395. [CrossRef]
16. Zhang, H.; Wu, S.; Chen, W.; Hu, Y.; Geng, Z.; Su, J. Bone/cartilage targeted hydrogel: Strategies and applications. Bioact. Mater.
2023 ,23, 156–169. [CrossRef]
17. Correa, S.; Grosskopf, A.K.; Hernandez, H.L.; Chan, D.; Yu, A.C.; Stapleton, L.M.; Appel, E.A. Translational applications of
hydrogels. Chem. Rev. 2021 ,121, 11385–11457. [CrossRef]Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 21 of 22
18. Zhang, R.; Xie, L.; Wu, H.; Yang, T.; Zhang, Q.; Tian, Y.; Liu, Y.; Han, X.; Guo, W.; He, M.; et al. Alginate/laponite hydrogel
microspheres co-encapsulating dental pulp stem cells and VEGF for endodontic regeneration. Acta Biomater. 2020 ,113, 305–316.
[CrossRef]
19. Zhao, Z.; Wang, Z.; Li, G.; Cai, Z.; Wu, J.; Wang, L.; Deng, L.; Cai, M.; Cui, W. Injectable microﬂuidic hydrogel microspheres for
cell and drug delivery. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2021 ,31, 2103339. [CrossRef]
20. Huang, Q.; Zou, Y.; Arno, M.C.; Chen, S.; Wang, T.; Gao, J.; Dove, A.P .; Du, J. Hydrogel scaffolds for differentiation of adipose-
derived stem cells. Chem. Soc. Rev. 2017 ,46, 6255–6275. [CrossRef]
21. Yang, J.; Yang, K.; Man, W.; Zheng, J.; Cao, Z.; Yang, C.-Y.; Kim, K.; Yang, S.; Hou, Z.; Wang, G.; et al. 3D bio-printed living
nerve-like ﬁbers reﬁne the ecological niche for long-distance spinal cord injury regeneration. Bioact. Mater. 2023 ,25, 160–175.
[CrossRef]
22. Ma, Y.; Yang, X.; Chen, Y.; Zhang, J.; Gai, K.; Chen, J.; Huo, F.; Guo, Q.; Guo, W.; Gou, M.; et al. Biomimetic peridontium patches
for functional periodontal regeneration. Adv. Healthc. Mater. 2023 ,12, 2202169. [CrossRef]
23. Fang, Y.; Guo, Y.; Ji, M.; Li, B.; Guo, Y.; Zhu, J.; Zhang, T.; Xiong, Z. 3D printing of cell-laden microgel-based biphasic bioink with
heterogeneous microenvironment for biomedical applications. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2022 ,32, 2109810. [CrossRef]
24. Wang, J.; Wang, C.; Wang, Q.; Zhang, Z.; Wang, H.; Wang, S.; Chi, Z.; Shang, L.; Wang, W.; Shu, Y. Microﬂuidic preparation
of gelatin methacryloyl microgels as local drug delivery vehicles for hearing loss therapy. Acs Appl. Mater. Inter. 2022 ,14,
46212–46223. [CrossRef]
25. Bendtsen, S.T.; Quinnell, S.P .; Wei, M. Development of a novel alginate-polyvinyl alcohol-hydroxyapatite hydrogel for 3D
bioprinting bone tissue engineered scaffolds. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 2017 ,105, 1457–1468. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Gao, F.; Xu, Z.; Liang, Q.; Liu, B.; Li, H.; Wu, Y.; Zhang, Y.; Lin, Z.; Wu, M.; Ruan, C.; et al. Direct 3D printing of high strength
biohybrid gradient hydrogel scaffolds for efﬁcient repair of osteochondral defect. Adv. Funct. Mater. 2018 ,28, 1706644. [CrossRef]
27. Gao, Q.; Niu, X.; Shao, L.; Zhou, L.; He, Y. 3D printing of complex GelMA-based scaffolds with nanoclay. Biofabrication 2019 ,
11, 035006. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
28. Zheng, J.; Zhao, F.; Zhang, W.; Mo, Y.; Zeng, L.; Li, X.; Chen, X. Sequentially-crosslinked biomimetic bioactive glass/gelatin
methacryloyl composites hydrogels for bone regeneration. Mater. Sci. Eng. C 2018 ,89, 119–127. [CrossRef]
29. Tian, T.; Xie, W.; Gao, W.; Wang, G.; Zeng, L.; Miao, G.; Lei, B.; Lin, Z.; Chen, X. Micro-nano bioactive glass particles incorporated
porous scaffold for promoting osteogenesis and angiogenesis in vitro. Front. Chem. 2019 ,7, 186. [CrossRef]
30. Hu, Q.; Chen, X.F.; Zhao, N.R.; Li, Y.L.; Mao, C. Fabrication and characterization of dodecylamine derived monodispersed
mesoporous bioactive glass sub-micron spheres. J. Sol-Gel Sci. Technol. 2014 ,69, 9–16. [CrossRef]
31. Van Den Bulcke, A.I.; Bogdanov, B.; De Rooze, N.; Schacht, E.H.; Cornelissen, M.; Berghmans, H. Structural and rheological
properties of methacrylamide modiﬁed gelatin hydrogels. Biomacromolecules 2000 ,1, 31–38. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
32. Emerton, K.; Drapeau, S.; Prasad, H.; Rohrer, M.; Roffe, P .; Hopper, K.; Schoolﬁeld, J.; Jones, A.; Cochran, D. Regeneration of
periodontal tissues in non-human primates with rhGDF-5 and beta-tricalcium phosphate. J. Dent. Res. 2011 ,90, 1416–1421.
[CrossRef] [PubMed]
33. Zhang, Y.; Miron, R.J.; Li, S.; Shi, B.; Sculean, A.; Cheng, X. Novel mesoporous bioglass/silk scaffold containing adPDGF-B and
adBMP7 for the repair of periodontal defects in beagle dogs. J. Clin. Periodontol. 2015 ,42, 262–271. [CrossRef]
34. Jian, Z.; Zhuang, T.; Qinyu, T.; Liqing, P .; Kun, L.; Xujiang, L.; Diaodiao, W.; Zhen, Y.; Shuangpeng, J.; Xiang, S.; et al. 3D
bioprinting of a biomimetic meniscal scaffold for application in tissue engineering. Bioact. Mater. 2021 ,6, 1711–1726. [CrossRef]
35. Li, T.; Zhai, D.; Ma, B.; Xue, J.; Zhao, P .; Chang, J.; Gelinsky, M.; Wu, C. 3D printing of hot dog-like biomaterials with hierarchical
architecture and distinct bioactivity. Adv. Sci. 2019 ,6, 1901146. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
36. Zhou, G.; Jiang, H.; Yin, Z.; Liu, Y.; Zhang, Q.; Zhang, C.; Pan, B.; Zhou, J.; Zhou, X.; Sun, H.; et al. In vitro regeneration of
patient-speciﬁc ear-shaped cartilage and its ﬁrst clinical application for auricular reconstruction. EBioMedicine 2018 ,28, 287–302.
[CrossRef]
37. Gu, Q.; Hao, J.; Lu, Y.; Wang, L.; Wallace, G.G.; Zhou, Q. Three-dimensional bio-printing. Sci. China Life Sci. 2015 ,58, 411–419.
[CrossRef]
38. Nichol, J.W.; Koshy, S.T.; Bae, H.; Hwang, C.M.; Yamanlar, S.; Khademhosseini, A. Cell-laden microengineered gelatin methacry-
late hydrogels. Biomaterials 2010 ,31, 5536–5544. [CrossRef]
39. Axpe, E.; Oyen, M. Applications of alginate-based bioinks in 3D bioprinting. Int. J. Mol. Sci. 2016 ,17, 1976. [CrossRef]
40. Ooi, H.W.; Mota, C.; ten Cate, A.T.; Calore, A.; Moroni, L.; Baker, M.B. Thiol–ene alginate hydrogels as versatile bioinks for
bioprinting. Biomacromolecules 2018 ,19, 3390–3400. [CrossRef]
41. Zheng, K.; Sui, B.; Ilyas, K.; Boccaccini, A.R. Porous bioactive glass micro- and nanospheres with controlled morphology:
Developments, properties and emerging biomedical applications. Mater. Horiz. 2021 ,8, 300–335. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
42. Kokubo, T.; Takadama, H. How useful is SBF in predicting in vivo bone bioactivity? Biomaterials 2006 ,27, 2907–2915. [CrossRef]
[PubMed]
43. Hoppe, A.; Güldal, N.S.; Boccaccini, A.R. A review of the biological response to ionic dissolution products from bioactive glasses
and glass-ceramics. Biomaterials 2011 ,32, 2757–2774. [CrossRef] [PubMed]
44. Mao, L.; Xia, L.; Chang, J.; Liu, J.; Jiang, L.; Wu, C.; Fang, B. The synergistic effects of Sr and Si bioactive ions on osteogenesis,
osteoclastogenesis and angiogenesis for osteoporotic bone regeneration. Acta Biomater. 2017 ,61, 217–232. [CrossRef]Biomolecules 2023 ,13, 1062 22 of 22
45. Lissenberg-Thunnissen, S.N.; de Gorter, D.J.J.; Sier, C.F.M.; Schipper, I.B. Use and efﬁcacy of bone morphogenetic proteins in
fracture healing. Int. Orthop. 2011 ,35, 1271–1280. [CrossRef]
46. Miron, R.J.; Zhang, Y.F. Osteoinduction: A review of old concepts with new standards. J. Dent. Res. 2012 ,91, 736–744. [CrossRef]
47. Sarment, D.P .; Cooke, J.W.; Miller, S.E.; Jin, Q.; McGuire, M.K.; Kao, R.T.; McClain, P .K.; McAllister, B.S.; Lynch, S.E.; Giannobile,
W.V . Effect of rhPDGF-BB on bone turnover during periodontal repair. J. Clin. Periodontol. 2006 ,33, 135–140. [CrossRef]
48. Ansari, S.; Sarrion, P .; Hasani-Sadrabadi, M.M.; Aghaloo, T.; Wu, B.M.; Moshaverinia, A. Regulation of the fate of dental-derived
mesenchymal stem cells using engineered alginate-GelMA hydrogels. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. A 2017 ,105, 2957–2967. [CrossRef]
49. Den Braber, E.T.; De Ruijter, J.E.; Ginsel, L.A.; Von Recum, A.F.; Jansen, J.A. Orientation of ECM protein deposition, ﬁbroblast
cytoskeleton, and attachment complex components on silicone microgrooved surfaces. J. Biomed. Mater. Res. 1998 ,40, 291–300.
[CrossRef]
Disclaimer/Publisher’s Note: The statements, opinions and data contained in all publications are solely those of the individual
author(s) and contributor(s) and not of MDPI and/or the editor(s). MDPI and/or the editor(s) disclaim responsibility for any injury to
people or property resulting from any ideas, methods, instructions or products referred to in the content.