Esophageal wound healing by aligned smooth muscle cell-laden
nanoﬁbrous patch
Miji Yeoa,b,1, Jung Won Yoonc,1, Gyu Tae Parkc, Sung-Chan Shine, Young-Cheol Songc,
Yong-Il Cheone, Byung-Joo Leee, Geun Hyung Kima,d,*, Jae Ho Kimc,**
aDepartment of Biomechatronic Engineering, College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU), Suwon 16419, Republic o f Korea
bDepartment of Engineering Science and Mechanics, Penn State University, University Park, PA 16802, USA
cDepartment of Physiology, School of Medicine, Pusan National University, Yangsan 50612, Republic of Korea
dBiomedical Institute for Convergence at SKKU (BICS), Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon 16419, Republic of Korea
eDepartment of Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, College of Medicine, Pusan National University and Medical Research Institute, Pusan Na tional University
Hospital, Busan 49241, Republic of Korea
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Cell electrospinning
Smooth muscle cellsEsophageal reconstructionABSTRACT
The esophagus exhibits peristalsis via contraction of circularly and longitudinally aligned smooth muscles, and
esophageal replacement is required if there is a critical-sized wound. In this study, we proposed to reconstruct
esophageal tissues using cell electrospinning (CE), an advanced technique for encapsulating living cells into ﬁbers
that allows control of the direction of ﬁber deposition. After treatment with transforming growth factor- β,
mesenchymal stem cell-derived smooth muscle cells (SMCs) were utilized for cell electrospinning or three-
dimensional bioprinting to compare the effects of aligned micropatterns on cell morphology. CE resulted in
SMCs with uniaxially arranged and elongated cell morphology with upregulated expression levels of SMC-speci ﬁc
markers, including connexin 43, smooth muscle protein 22 alpha (SM22 α), desmin, and smoothelin. When SMC-
laden nano ﬁbrous patches were transplanted into a rat esophageal defect model, the SMC patch promoted
regeneration of esophageal wounds with an increased number of newly formed blood vessels and enhanced the
SMC-speci ﬁc markers of SM22 αand vimentin. Taken together, CE with its advantages, such as guidance of highly
elongated, aligned cell morphology and accelerated SMC differentiation, can be an ef ﬁcient strategy to recon-
struct smooth muscle tissues and treat esophageal perforation.
1. Introduction
The esophagus is a tubular organ that extends from the epiglottis in
the pharynx to the stomach. This organ is composed of thin, elongated
smooth muscle cells (SMCs) aligned in a parallel manner for contractile
function. When food is swallowed, the esophagus pushes the ingested
food bolus toward the stomach via peristalsis, which is mediated by the
contraction of circular and longitudinal esophageal muscles [ 1]. Esoph-
ageal diseases, such as congenital defects and esophageal cancer, cause
circumferential, full-thickness, and extended segment loss of the esoph-
agus. Gastric pull-up conduits or colon interpositions are usually used totreat esophageal perforations. However, esophageal substitutes have
shown limited success [ 2]. Therefore, esophageal tissue engineering has
attracted attention as a promising strategy for regenerating damaged
native esophagus [ 3]. However, to the best of our knowledge, no evi-
dence has shown that an engineered esophageal substitute can success-
fully mimic the structural and functional characteristics of the smooth
muscles in the esophagus. Recently, stem cell-based tissue engineering
has emerged as a potential method to improve the therapeutic ef ﬁcacy of
engineered substitutes composed of endogenous cells.
Mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) can differentiate into multiple cell
lineages, including adipocytes, osteoblasts, chondrocytes, skeletal
* Corresponding author. Department of Biomechatronic Engineering, College of Biotechnology and Bioengineering, Sungkyunkwan University (SKKU) , Suwon,
16419, Republic of Korea.
** Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: takapy_@naver.com (M. Yeo), wjddnjssky@nate.com (J.W. Yoon), daramzuy2@naver.com (G.T. Park), cha-nwi@daum.net (S.-C. Shin),
dudcjf1114@naver.com (Y.-C. Song), skydragonone@naver.com (Y.-I. Cheon), voicelee@pusan.ac.kr (B.-J. Lee), gkimbme@skku.edu (G.H. Kim), jhkimst@pusan.
ac.kr (J.H. Kim).
1These authors contributed equally to this work.
Contents lists available at ScienceDirect
Materials Today Bio
journal homepage: www.journals.elsevier.com/materials-today-bio
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100564
Received 17 November 2022; Received in revised form 22 January 2023; Accepted 24 January 2023
Available online 26 January 20232590-0064/ ©2023 The Authors. Published by Elsevier Ltd. This is an open access article under the CC BY-NC-ND license ( http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-
nc-nd/4.0/ ).Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564myocytes, and SMCs [ 4–6]. Transforming growth factor- β1 (TGF- β1) is a
potent inducer of MSC-to-SMC differentiation via activation of the
TGF- β–SMAD signaling cascade [ 7,8]. Some studies have shown that
TGF- β1 treatment increases the expression of SMC-speci ﬁc ion channels
in human adipose-derived MSCs [ 9]. In addition to extracellular stimuli,
cell alignment through micropatterning has been reported to increase the
expression levels of F-actin and alpha smooth muscle actin ( α-SMA) in
SMCs and promote the contractile phenotype [ 10,11]. Because direct
transplantation of SMCs into damaged tissues does not support cell
alignment and contractile function in smooth muscle tissues, several
strategies, including the use of aligned substrates and electrospun ﬁbers,
have been developed to guide cell alignment [ 12,13]. However, devel-
oping an implantable substitute with an aligned pattern, mechanical
strength, and bioactive cues to promote cellular activities in three di-
mensions (3D) remains a challenge.
Surface topography has been reported to regulate cell adhesion,
cytoskeletal organization, and cell-cell interactions and plays a key role
in the lineage speci ﬁcation of stem cells [ 14,15]. Cells sense surface
patterns and nanoscale biochemical and biophysical stimuli [ 16]; sub-
micron topography regulates various stem cell responses, including
proliferation, migration, and differentiation [ 17] by changing the focal
adhesion assembly, which causes variations in cytoskeletal organization
and cell mechanical properties [ 18]. Therefore, topographical features,
such as anisotropic patterning, nanostructures, and ﬁbrillar structures,
could play a signi ﬁcant role in spatial organization during myogenesis
[19–21]. Microgrooved topography with stiff substrates has been shown
to stimulate differentiation of MSCs into SMCs [ 22]. Moreover, micro-
grooved topography and TGF- β1 treatment synergistically stimulate the
expression of SMC-speci ﬁc contractile proteins in MSCs [ 23]. However,
topographic modulation in esophageal tissue engineering using MSCs has
not yet been studied.
3D cell printing (CP) is an emerging technique for fabricating tissue
substitutes that can mimic tissues or organs, but generating a 3D
construct with tissue-speci ﬁc cells and desired topographic features has
been challenging [ 24,25]. Electrospinning is a prevailing technique
generating micro/nano ﬁbers using both synthetic and natural polymers.
Allowing reconstruction of desired topographic features, electrospinning
has been utilized for various applications, including smart materials (i.e.,
stimuli-responsive mats, superhydrophilic or superhydrophobic mats,
and sensors), environmentally friendly materials (i.e., membranes for
water and air ﬁltration), soft electronics (i.e., ﬂexible and stretchable
materials and personal devices), and biomedical applications (i.e.,
nanoﬁber-based scaffolds with biophysical and biochemical cues) [ 26,
27]. Cell electrospinning (CE) has great potential in biomedical appli-
cations due to its ability to encapsulate living cells directly into micro/-
nanoﬁbers while allowing the control of micropattern formation. This
process improves nutritional accessibility and cell distribution at
different scales of the scaffold, which can overcome the limitations of
conventional electrospinning and 3D bioprinting techniques [ 28]. Owing
to CE advantages, various cell types, such as neuroblastoma cells, cardiac
myocytes, osteoblasts, and adipose stem cells, have been utilized in CE
[28–31]. In addition, we previously demonstrated that myoblasts and
human umbilical vein endothelial cells could be successfully remodeled
into an aligned topography using the CE process [ 32,33]. Hence, in this
study, CE was utilized to build an anisotropically arranged smooth
muscle substitute to mimic native esophageal tissues.
As of now, there have been several attempts to develop engineered
esophageal substitutes. For instance, electrospinning was utilized using
the mixture of decellularized esophagus extracellular matrix (ECM) and
polyamide-6 (PA-6) [ 34]. Human adipose- and bone marrow-derived
mesenchymal stromal cells were cultured on randomly orientedECM/PA-6 ﬁbers, in which some cell proliferation was revealed with
25% of scaffold cell coverage. On the other hand, electro-hydrodynamic
jetting was carried out using the blend of polycaprolactone (PCL) and
Pluronic F127 (PF127) to develop scaffolds in 90
/C14grid patterns [ 35].
PCL/PF127 scaffolds showed an enhanced ultimate tensile strength (1.2MPa) by PCL and better wettability by PF127. Further, when human
esophageal ﬁbroblasts were cultured on the PCL/PF127 scaffold, cell
growth direction was guided in vitro by the orientation of scaffolds in two
perpendicular directions. These studies have shown potential of in vitro
engineered esophageal scaffolds, but acellular fabrication techniques
eventually cause inhomogeneous cell distribution by cell seeding and
include multiple fabrication steps increasing risks of external contami-
nation factors prior to implantation. Also, differentiation to esophageal
smooth muscle cells and in vivo study should be more thoroughly
investigated to further verify healing capacity as esophageal substitutes.
In this study, several main driving factors of SMC regeneration were
investigated to validate the CE process. Brie ﬂy, MSCs and TGF- β1-treated
MSCs (referred to as SMCs) were compared using SMC-speci ﬁc markers
to estimate the ef ﬁciency of MSC-to-SMC differentiation. Followed by
TGF- β1 treatment, MSCs and SMCs were cultured on a 2D substrate with
and without aligned electrospun ﬁbers to estimate the effects on cell
alignment and SMC differentiation. Finally, MSCs and SMCs were uti-
lized to develop a cell-laden 3D substitute fabricated via CE and CP and
examined for various cellular activities. To assess the applicability of CE
in clinical use, we developed an aligned SMC-laden ﬁbrous patch and
examined its therapeutic effects using a rat esophageal wound model.
2. Materials &methods
2.1. Materials
α-Minimum Essential Medium ( α-MEM), Hank's balanced salt solu-
tion (HBSS), fetal bovine serum (FBS), and trypsin-EDTA were purchased
from Invitrogen (Carlsbad, CA, USA). TGF- β1 was purchased from
PeproTech (Cranbury, NJ, USA). Smooth muscle growth medium-2
(SmGM™-2) was purchased from Lonza (Bazel, Switzerland). Poly-
caprolactone (PCL; molecular weight (M w)¼45,000 Da), calcium chlo-
ride (CaCl 2), and polyethylene oxide (PEO; M w¼900,000) were
purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (St. Louis, MO, USA). Sodium alginate
with 0.42 mannuronic acid to guluronic acid (M/G) ratio (LF10/60; FMC
Biopolymer, Drammen, Norway) was kindly provided by Pharmaline
(Suwon, South Korea). 40,6-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) was pur-
chased from Merck (Darmstadt, Germany). The antibodies used in this
study are listed in Table S1 .
2.2. Culture of MSCs and differentiation to SMCs
After obtaining informed consent from patients, human palatine
tonsil tissues were isolated from patients undergoing tonsillectomy for
chronic tonsillar hypertrophy and chronic tonsillitis in the Department of
Otorhinolaryngology-Head and Neck Surgery, Pusan National University
Hospital [ 36,37]. To isolate tonsil-derived MSCs, tonsil tissues were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and digested at 37/C14C for
30 min with 0.075% type I collagenase. The enzyme activity was
neutralized with α-MEM supplemented with 10% FBS and 10% pen-
icillin –streptomycin. The dissociated cells were ﬁltered through a sterile
70μm cell strainer and cultured in 5% CO 2at 37/C14C. When the cell
conﬂuency reached 70 –80%, the cells were washed twice with HBSS,
treated with 0.05% trypsin-EDTA, and incubated in 5% CO 2at 37/C14C for
3–5 min. The suspended cells were harvested in medium containing FBS
and centrifuged at 500 /C2gfor 4 min. MSCs were subcultured at a split
ratio of 1:3 or 1:4, and cells at passage 7 –9 were used for experiments. To
differentiate MSCs into SMCs, MSCs were serum-starved in α-MEM basal
medium for 24 h, treated with 2 ng/mL TGF- β1 for 4 days, and then
maintained in SmGM ™-2 medium. The expression of SMC markers was
determined by western blotting and ﬂow cytometric analysis.
2.3. Western blotting
To extract total proteins, cells were treated with lysis buffer (20 mM
Tris-HCl, 1 mM EGTA, 1 mM EDTA, 10 mM NaCl, 0.1 mMM. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
2phenylmethylsulfonyl ﬂuoride, 1 mM Na 3VO4, 30 mM sodium pyro-
phosphate, 25 mM β-glycerol phosphate, and 1% Triton X-100, pH 7.4),
followed by sonication and centrifugation at 12,000 rpm at 4/C14C for 10
min. Lysates were resolved using sodium dodecyl sulfate-polyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis and transferred onto nitrocellulose membranes. The
membranes were blocked with 5% skim milk buffer for 2 h and incubated
overnight with primary antibodies. For visualization with chem-
iluminescence, the membranes were incubated with horseradish
peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies for 1 h, and the signal was
detected using an ECL kit (Cytiva, Mariborough, MA, USA). The mem-
brane was washed four times for 20 min with 1 /C2Tris-buffered saline
with Tween 20.
2.4. Flow cytometric analysis
MSCs and MSC-derived SMCs were ﬁxed with 4% paraformaldehyde
(PFA) for 1 h at 4/C14C, and washed with PBS three times. The cells were
permeabilized with 0.1% triton X-100 for 30 min and blocked with 0.5%
BSA for 1 h. Primary antibodies were incubated with cells at 4/C14C for 1 h,
and the cells were treated with secondary antibodies conjugated with
Alexa Fluor 647 (Invitrogen) at 4/C14C for 30 min. Cells labeled with
ﬂuorescent antibodies were washed with PBS three times and analyzed
by Attune NxT Flow cytometer (Thermo ﬁsher, USA). Obtained ﬂuores-
cence signals were analyzed using the FlowJo (ver 10, Tree Star Inc.).
2.5. Cell growth on two-dimensional (2D) surface with or without aligned
ﬁbers
A rectangular glass (10 /C210 mm) was used as the non- ﬁbrous surface.
Aligned alginate ﬁbers were deposited by electrospinning onto the glass
under a 10.5 kV high-voltage power source, 140 mm nozzle-to-electrode
(NtE) distance, 0.25 mL/h ﬂow rate, and 3 min of electrospinning time.
Theﬁbers were aligned using rectangular copper electrodes (75 /C225
mm) and a metal nozzle (180 μm inner diameter). MSCs and SMCs were
diluted to 62,500 cells/droplet and the equivalent number of cells laden
on the CE scaffold were seeded onto the glass with or without aligned
ﬁbers.
2.6. Preparation of cell-laden bioink
To prepare the cell-laden bioink, 20 mg/mL alginate and 30 mg/mL
PEO (A2P3) were dissolved in triple-distilled water and magnetically
stirred for 2 days at 4/C14C. Then, 1 /C2107cells/mL MSCs or SMCs were
added to the A2P3 solution.
2.7. Fabrication of cell-printed and cell-electrospun scaffolds using MSCs
and SMCs
A 3D printer (DTR3-2210-T-SG, DASA Robot, Bucheon, South Korea)
was used to fabricate the PCL strut (300 μm in diameter and 30 mm in
length). Pneumatic pressure (340 kPa) was applied to the heated metal
barrel containing PCL at 100/C14C, and the melted PCL was extruded
through a metal nozzle (350 μm inner diameter) at 10 mm/s. Subse-
quently, CP was performed on the printed PCL struts. The cell-laden
bioink was printed through a nozzle (180 μm inner diameter) using a
pneumatic pressure of 120 kPa and nozzle moving speed of 10 mm/s.
For CE, a high-voltage power source (SHV300RD-50K, Convertech,
Gwangmyeong, South Korea) and syringe pump (KDS 230, NanoNC, Inc.,
Seoul, South Korea) were prepared. The cell-laden bioink was supplied at
0.25 mL/h, and electrospun under a 10.5 kV high voltage direct current
(HVDC) and 140 mm NtE distance. Electrospun ﬁbers were deposited on
the PCL strut, which was ﬁxed between parallel cylindrical electrodes at a
distance of 30 mm.
To fabricate the PCL ﬁbrous mat, electrospinning was performed
using 10% PCL dissolved in methylene chloride and dimethylformamide
at a ratio of 4:1. The PCL ﬁbers were collected on a grounded rotatingdrum at 1500 rpm using 0.20 mL/h ﬂow rate and 0.1 kV/mm electric
ﬁeld (12 kV HVDC and 120 mm NtE distance) for 4 h.
2.8. In vitro characterization
Optical images were captured using a BX FM-32 optical microscope
(Olympus, Japan) to observe the surface topography of the constructs. To
obtain microscale images, the samples were placed on double-sided
carbon tape and sputter-coated with gold, and their images were
captured using a scanning electron microscope (SEM; SNE-3000 M; SEC
Inc., Suwon, South Korea).
Stress-strain curves were obtained using a microtensile tester (Top-
tech 2000; Chemilab, Suwon, South Korea) under uniaxial stretching at
0.2 mm/s. The samples were vertically ﬁxed between two grips with a 10
mm gap and stretched upward until failure.
2.9. Analysis of cell viability and differentiation on cell-laden scaffolds
Cell viability at various time points during culturing (days 0, 7, 14,
and 21) was measured using a Live/Dead Viability/Cytotoxicity Kit
(Invitrogen). The samples were immersed in a solution containing 0.15
mM calcein AM and 2 mM ethidium homodimer-1 for 30 min, and im-
ages were captured using a light microscope. Cell viability was calculated
as the ratio of the number of live cells to the total cell number using Fiji
software.
Cell nuclei and F-actin were visualized by DAPI (blue) and phalloidin
(green) staining, respectively. The samples were ﬁxed in formaldehyde
solution (3.7% in Tris-buffered saline [TBS]) for 12 h at 4/C14C and treated
with 0.3% Triton X-100 in TBS for 10 min at 25/C14C. The samples were
then treated for 1 h at 37/C14C with a solution of phalloidin (15 U/mL;
Invitrogen) and DAPI (5 μM; Invitrogen). Fluorescence images were
captured using a confocal microscope (LSM 700; Carl Zeiss, Germany)
and analyzed using Fiji software.
Differentiation of MSCs and SMCs was observed using immuno ﬂuo-
rescence staining. The samples were ﬁxed and permeabilized prior to
phalloidin and DAPI staining. The samples were then immersed in 1%
bovine serum albumin in TBS for 1 h at room temperature. Primary an-
tibodies against α-SMA, ﬁbronectin, calponin, collagen I, and collagen IV
at a 1:200 dilution in TBS were added to the samples and incubated
overnight at 4/C14C. The samples were subsequently stained with secondary
antibodies conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 or 594 (Invitrogen). Images
were captured using confocal microscopy and analyzed using Fiji
software.
2.10. Reverse transcription-quantitative polymerase chain reaction (RT-
qPCR)
The expression levels of connexin 43 ( CX43 ), smooth muscle protein
22 alpha ( SM22 α), desmin, and smoothelin ( SMTN ) were analyzed by RT-
qPCR. Brie ﬂy, total RNA was isolated using TRI reagent (Sigma-Aldrich),
according to the manufacturer's instructions. The purity and concentra-
tion of the isolated RNA were determined using a spectrophotometer
(FLX800T; Biotek, VT, USA). cDNA synthesis was performed using 500
ng RNase-free, DNase-treated, total RNA using a reverse transcription
system (FSQ-201; Toyobo, Osaka, Japan). Gene expression levels were
measured by the comparative C tmethod using the StepOne Plus RT-PCR
system (Applied Biosystems, Foster City, CA, USA). GAPDH expression
was used as an internal control. The primers used in this study are listed
inTable S2 .
2.11. Repair of esophageal wounds using SMC-laden patch
Six-month-old Sprague-Dawley rats (Central Lab Animal Inc., Seoul,
Korea), weighing approximately 680 –700 g, were used in this study. The
rats were divided into three groups (n ¼3 per group) and anesthetized
with iso ﬂurane (Baxter International Inc., USA). Two independentM. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
3animal experiments were repeated for statistical analysis of histological
and immunostaining results. Anesthesia delivery equipment was used to
administer a gas mixture of iso ﬂurane and O 2via inhalation into the rat's
respiratory system. Before anesthesia, iso ﬂurane was evaporated in a
vaporizer (Harvard Apparatus, USA), and the concentration was set to
5% and adjusted to 2% during the operation. The gas ﬂow rate of O 2was
maintained at 0.5 –1 L/min.
To create the esophageal wound model, the center of the ventral neck
was shaved, an incision of approximately 2 cm was made, and the
esophagus was located in the tracheoesophageal structure. To equalize
the size of the esophageal wound, a 2 mm diameter biopsy punch (Miltex,
KAI Industries, Japan) was used to completely puncture the muscle and
mucosal layer of the esophagus. The patches were cut with a 4 mm
diameter biopsy punch and placed over the esophageal wound, and the
punctured section of the esophagus was sutured with a 9 –0 nylon suture
(AILEE Co., Korea). The incised skin was sutured using a 7 –0 nylon su-
ture. All surgical procedures were performed using sterile instruments
and disinfection procedures. The mice were fasted for the ﬁrst 3 days,
sterilized water was provided after 4 days, and food was provided after 6
days, postoperatively. During the fasting period, the water consumption
was considered as evidence of esophageal restoration. Two weeks after
surgery, the rats were sacri ﬁced by CO 2euthanasia. All animal experi-
ments were reviewed and approved by the Institutional Review Board of
the Pusan National University Hospital (PNUH-2021-188).
2.12. Histological analysis
For histological analysis of esophageal regeneration, esophageal tis-
sues were excised along with tracheal tissue to support the esophagus.
For routine staining, tissues were ﬁxed with cooled acetone. To obtain
cryosections, the tissue was perfused with sucrose solution, embedded in
optimal cutting temperature compound, and frozen at /C080/C14C. Tissue
sections were then stained with hematoxylin and eosin (H &E) and
Masson's trichrome stain. Stained sections were scanned using an Axio
Scan.Z1 (Carl Zeiss Microscopy).
For immunohistochemical analysis, the tissue samples were ﬁxed in
4% PFAPFA overnight and embedded in paraf ﬁn. To detect smooth
muscle regeneration and vascularization, the esophageal tissue sections
were stained with anti-SM22 α, anti-IL-B4, anti-vimentin, and anti-
desmin antibodies. Epithelium of esophageal tissues were stained with
anti-cytokeratin 14, and Macrophages were stained with anti-CD68
antibody. The secondary antibodies used were goat anti-mouse anti-
body conjugated with Alexa Fluor 488 or 568 and streptavidin conju-
gated to Alexa Fluor 488, and DAPI was used to stain the nuclei. The
stained sections were visualized under a laser confocal microscope
(Olympus FluoView FV1000) and an Axio Scan.Z1 (Carl Zeiss Micro-
scopy). The ﬂuorescence levels were quanti ﬁed in a high-power ﬁeld
using ImageJ software.
2.13. Statistical analysis
The data are presented as the mean /C6standard deviation and were
analyzed using SPSS 18 software (SPSS, Inc., Chicago, IL, USA). Differ-
ences among multiple groups were compared by one-way ANOVA with
post-hoc Bonferroni tests, and statistical signi ﬁcance was represented as
*p<0.05, **p<0.01, and ***p<0.001.
3. Results
3.1. MSC-to-SMC differentiation via TGF- β1 treatment and surface
topography
Prior to applying CE or CP, differentiation of MSCs into SMCs in vitro
was induced by treating MSCs with TGF- β1, and its ef ﬁcacy was analyzed
using western blotting. TGF- β1 treatment increased the expression levels
of several SMC markers, including calponin, α-SMA, SM22 α, vimentin,desmin, and SMTN, indicating that MSCs had successfully differentiated
into SMCs ( Fig. S1 ). To con ﬁrm the TGF- β1-induced differentiation of
MSCs to SMCs, the expression of SMC markers, such as α-SMA and
SM22 α, were measured by ﬂow cytometric analysis. The expression
levels of α-SMA and SM22 αwere greatly increased in SMCs compared
with MSCs, and the percentages of α-SMA- and SM22 α-positive cells in
SMCs were 93.4% and 84.6%, respectively ( Fig. S1b ). In addition,
phosphorylation levels of Smad2, which is a key transcription factor
involved in TGF- βsignaling, was elevated in SMCs than MSCs ( Fig. S1c ),
indicating pivotal role of Smad2 in the TGF- β1-induced differentiation of
MSCs to SMCs.
The effects of the aligned topography on SMC differentiation were
examined in 2D cultures. It has been reported that cell elongation pro-
motes the differentiation of MSCs into SMCs [ 12,38], and cell morphol-
ogies affect the phenotypic modulation of SMCs [ 39]. MSCs and SMCs
were seeded after electrospinning the aligned ﬁbers on a 2D substrate
(Fig. S2a ). A plain 2D substrate was used as a control. Compared to the
cells cultured on the plain surface, the MSCs and SMCs cultured on the
aligned ﬁbers exhibited higher degrees of cell elongation and cell
alignment as well as increased expression levels of SMC markers ( α-SMA
and calponin) and SMC-related extracellular matrix (ECM) markers
(collagen I, collagen IV, and ﬁbronectin) ( Figs. S2b –d). These results
suggest that the differentiation of MSCs into SMCs was promoted by cell
alignment and elongation in 2D. Thus, MSCs and SMCs were used in CE
to obtain aligned ﬁbers and develop a smooth muscle regenerative
scaffold.
3.2. CP and CE of MSCs and SMCs
Next, we compared the effects of CE and CP in the presence of cell
alignment. The bioink was prepared by mixing a 2% alginate and 3% PEO
(A2P3) solution with MSCs and SMCs at 1 /C2107cells/mL. Alginate is a
biocompatible, non-toxic, and versatile polymer that enables rapid
gelation of the microstructure through the addition of cations [ 40]. PEO
was added as a processing material to optimize the surface tension,
conductivity, and molecular entanglement for electrospinning [ 41]. The
composition of the A2P3 solution was based on a previous study thatshowed stable ﬁber formation and alignment [ 32]. As shown in Fig. 1 a,
CP and CE were performed with SMC-laden A2P3, according to the
schematic illustration. In the optical images, a cell-electrospun scaffold
had an aligned ﬁbrous structure, whereas the cell-printed scaffold had a
plain bulk structure. The morphology of SMCs was observed by phal-
loidin/DAPI staining after 7 days of culture. The cells of the CP scaffold
had a round shape similar to that on day 0, whereas the cells of the CE
scaffold exhibited an elongated morphology. These results clearly
showed different degrees of cell alignment and elongation, depending on
the presence of aligned micropatterns in a 3D environment. However,
these scaffolds, which can be easily bent and deformed, are unsuitable for
long-term culture because of their low mechanical strength.
To supplement the low mechanical strength of the electrospun or
bioprinted structures, a PCL strut was applied as a mechanical support for
the CP and CE processes. To generate PCL struts, PCL pellets were melted
at a high temperature of 100
/C14C and then 3D printed using 340 kPa of
pneumatic pressure and 10 mm/s nozzle moving speed, yielding a 300
μm PCL strut ( Fig. 1 b (i)). Then, using CP, MSCs and SMCs were printed
onto the PCL strut using 120 kPa of pneumatic pressure and 10 mm/s
nozzle moving speed, which are referred to as CP-MSC and CP-SMC,
respectively ( Fig. 1 b (ii)). In the meantime, CE using MSCs and SMCs
was performed on the PCL strut with fabricating parameters of 140 mm
NtE distance, 0.075 kV/mm electric ﬁeld, and 0.25 mL/h ﬂow rate
(Fig. 1 b (iii)). The scaffolds created by CE using MSCs and SMCs are
referred to as CE-MSC and CE-SMC, respectively.
The topographical features of the scaffolds fabricated using CP and CE
were captured using optical and SEM imaging. The CP scaffolds exhibited
plain surfaces, whereas the CE ﬁbers exhibited aligned micropatterns
(Fig. 1 c and d). When MSCs were utilized for both CP and CE process,M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
4MSC-laden scaffolds in the absence of TGF- β1 treatment show the effects
of aligned micropatterns on SMC differentiation. To evaluate the
biocompatibility of the CP and CE processes, the viability of the MSCs
and SMCs on each scaffold was measured. The results showed high initialcell viability ( >90%) for MSC- and SMC-laden scaffolds ( Fig. 1 e), indi-
cating that both CP and CE structures provided a biocompatible micro-
environment for MSCs and SMCs.3.3. Cell compatibility of cell-printed and cell-electrospun scaffolds
Fig. 2 a shows the cell viability after the CP and CE processes, in which
live (green) and dead (red) cells were captured after 7, 14, and 21 days ofculturing. High cell viability over 90% was maintained for 21 days for the
MSCs and SMCs, indicating that both the CP and CE processes provided
the cells with a biocompatible microenvironment to support cellular
activities ( Fig. 2 b). Next, the number of cells on day 21 was counted from
Fig. 1. Microstructures of cell printing (CP) and cell
electrospinning (CE) with mesenchymal stem cells
(MSCs) and stem cell-derived smooth muscle cells
(SMCs). (a) Schematic illustration of CP and CE pro-cess without the supplement of a polycaprolactone
(PCL) strut. The fabrication procedures for CE and CP
are shown in the upper panels, and the optical andﬂuorescent images (phalloidin/DAPI double staining)
were captured on days 0 and 7. (b) A schematic
illustration of the PCL printing, CP, and CE processes.The fabricated scaffolds (CP-MSC, CP-SMC, CE-MSC,and CE-SMC) are represented as (c) optical, (d) SEM,
and (e) live/dead cell images on day 0.M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
5the images of the Live/Dead assay ( Fig. 2 c). CE-SMC showed the highest
cell numbers compared to the other groups, suggesting that cell prolif-
eration was promoted by the synergistic effects of TGF- β[42] and the
submicron structure that are favorable for cell migration and nutrient
exchange.
3.4. Effects of CP and CE on SMC differentiation
Fig. 3 a shows DAPI/phalloidin staining of MSCs and SMCs on the CP
and CE scaffolds. The CP scaffolds (CP-MSC and CP-SMC) contained cells
with multipolar morphology, while the CE scaffolds (CE-MSC and CE-
SMC) had anisotropically aligned, spindle-shaped cells. These features
were quantitatively analyzed using the F-actin aspect ratio and orienta-
tion ( Fig. 3 b and c). The non-elongated and randomly oriented
morphology of cells on the CP scaffolds had lower F-actin aspect ratios
and orientation factor, while these factors were greatly increased in cells
on the CE scaffolds. Furthermore, ECM components, such as ﬁbronectin,
collagen I, and collagen IV, were shown to form cytoskeletal structures
(Fig. 3 d). Fibronectin has been reported to enhance cell migration [ 43],
and collagen has been shown to enhance mechanical strength and pre-
vent physical failure of tissues [ 44]. CE-SMCs showed enhanced
expression of all three ECM components ( ﬁbronectin, collagen I, and
collagen IV) ( Fig. 3 e).
α-SMA is an actin isoform developed to contribute to cell-generated
mechanical tension and can be used as a marker of early stage SMC
differentiation [ 45]. Despite having a well-developed cytoskeletal
structure, CP-MSCs and CE-MSCs showed very low expression of α-SMA
(Fig. 4 a). The expression levels and aspect ratio of α-SMA in CP-SMCs and
CE-SMCs were upregulated 3-fold compared to those in MSCs ( Fig. 4 b).
Additionally, the α-SMA orientation factor was signi ﬁcantly higher inCP-MSCs and CE-MSCs owing to the cell arrangement along the aligned
topographical cues ( Fig. 4 c). Calponin, a smooth muscle-speci ﬁc protein
expressed during the later stages of differentiation, was used to measure
the degree of SMC differentiation. Signi ﬁcantly higher calponin expres-
sion was observed in SMCs than that in MSCs ( Fig. 4 d), suggesting that
cells treated with TGF- β(SMC-laden scaffolds) could successfully initiate
SMC differentiation, while cells without TGF- βtreatment (MSC-laden
scaffolds) may not fully differentiate into SMCs. Then, the levels of
smooth muscle-speci ﬁc genes were evaluated by qPCR analysis ( Fig. 4 e).
The expression levels of CX43 ,SM22 α, desmin, and SMTN were highest
in CE-SMCs compared to those in the other groups, suggesting that
CE-SMCs exhibited more mature SMC phenotypes.
3.5. Development of a cell-laden patch using PCL ﬁbrous mat for
transplantation
Prior to in vivo application, a solid PCL strut was used as a mechanical
support for the in vitro study; however, this solid structure would not be
suitable for transplantation onto the curved surface of the esophagus.
Therefore, the PCL strut was substituted with acellular, ﬂexible PCL ﬁ-
bers fabricated via electrospinning ( Fig. S3a ). Here, PCL ﬁbers were
deposited in aligned patterns, and random patterns were not considered
for comparison. Indeed, CP scaffold is rational as a control group to be
consistent with in vitro test. However, SMCs on CP scaffold will get more
affected by micropattern of PCL ﬁbrous mat instead of bulky, non-
patterned printed structure, so the experimental groups were opted to
show effects of aligned micropattern and electrospun SMCs. Further-
more, since PCL provides high biocompatibility, strong mechanical
integrity, and slow degradation rate suitable for in vivo tests [ 46], it was
selected to fabricate a ﬁbrous mat. Moreover, alginate nano ﬁbers (0.7 /C6
0.3μm), speci ﬁcally less than 1 μm diameter, may not provide surface
area suf ﬁcient for cell proliferation, but PCL micro ﬁbers (1.1 /C60.2μm)
can support cell adhesion, viability, and proliferation [ 47,48]. In the
meantime, PCL ﬁber density was found to not affect cell proliferation rate
signiﬁcantly [ 46]. The PCL ﬁbers were then compared with PCL struts
and alginate ﬁbers, which exhibited much stiffer mechanical properties,
as shown in the stress –strain curves ( Fig. S3b ). In addition, Young's
modulus values (1.7 /C60.2 and 2.0 /C60.1 MPa) and maximum strength
(8.6/C62.5 and 9.2 /C61.7 MPa) were similar between PCL ﬁbers and PCL
struts ( Fig. S3c ). Owing to its ﬂexible shape and appropriate mechanical
properties, a PCL ﬁbrous mat was used to develop a cell-laden structure
forin vivo testing.
3.6. Regeneration of esophageal wound using electrospun SMC patch in
vivo
Esophageal replacement is often required by patients with esophageal
diseases; therefore, engineered esophageal substitutes must be veri ﬁed
for their feasibility and regenerative effects [ 49]. Among the different
methods investigated in vitro , CE-SMC exhibited more mature SMC-like
phenotypes; therefore, it was selected to study the therapeutic effects
in an in vivo esophageal wound model. An acellular PCL patch was used as
a control.
The esophagus is composed of inner and outer muscle layers, ar-
ranged in circular and longitudinal orientations, respectively. To fabri-
cate a patch for esophageal transplantation, PCL was ﬁrst electrospun
onto a drum collector to produce a PCL ﬁbrous mat ( Fig. 5 a). To mimic
the structure of the esophagus, SMCs were electrospun in ﬁve layers in
the horizontal and vertical directions and cultured for 4 weeks prior to
transplantation. For transplantation, the fabricated patch was shaped
with a 4 mm diameter biopsy punch ( Fig. 5 b(ⅰ)). To generate the rat
esophageal wound model, the esophageal tissue was punctured with a 2
mm biopsy punch ( Fig. 5 b(ⅱ)), and the muscles around the esophagus
and the inner mucosal layer were completely removed ( Fig. 5 b(ⅲ), (ⅳ)).
Subsequently, the punctured section of the esophagus was covered with
the fabricated patch and sutured ( Fig. 5 b(ⅴ)). Two weeks after surgery,
Fig. 2. Biocompatibility of cell printing (CP) and cell electrospinning (CE)
represented by cell viability and the number of cells. (a) Live/Dead images of
CP-mesenchymal stem cell (MSC), CP-stem cell-derived smooth muscle cell(SMC), CE-MSC, and CE-SMC on days 7, 14, and 21. Quanti ﬁcation of the Live/
Dead images with respect to (b) cell viability and (c) cell numbers. Data indicate
mean /C6SD (n ¼5).M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
6the tracheoesophageal tissue was dissected in the transverse direction
(Fig. 5 b(ⅵ); left arrow, trachea; right arrow, esophagus).
Histological analysis of the esophageal tissues was performed using
H&E and Masson's trichrome staining. Thick ﬁbrotic tissues and
increased in ﬁltration of immune cells were observed in tissues trans-
planted with the control patch ( Fig. 5 c). In contrast, the esophagus
transplanted with the CE-SMC patch exhibited a thick muscle layer and
granulation tissue ( Fig. 5 d). To determine whether the transplanted
patch promoted esophageal tissue regeneration, a detailed analysis was
performed after immunostaining for vascular and smooth muscle
markers ( Fig. 6 a, c). The number of ILB4þ-SM22 αþblood vessels was
higher in rats treated with the CE-SMC patch than in those treated with
the control patch ( Fig. 6 e). Furthermore, the CE-SMC patch group
exhibited abundant newly formed blood vessels, indicating that vascu-
larization was promoted by the CE-SMC patch. Consequently, CE-SMC
patch transplantation signi ﬁcantly increased the levels of SM22 αand
vimentin relative to those in the control group ( Fig. 6 b, d). These data
indicate higher esophageal muscle regeneration in the SMC-patch group
than that in the control patch group. To con ﬁrm complete regeneration of
esophageal epithelial cells, the esophageal specimens were stained with
antibody against cytokeratin 14, a marker of squamous epithelial cells in
the esophagus. The cytokeratin 14-positive esophageal epithelial cells
covered the esophageal wounds of both control and SMC-patch groups(Fig. S4 ), suggesting epithelial cell recruitment during wound healing.
To assess the effects of the CE-SMC patch on macrophage in ﬁltration
at the transplantation site, we performed CD68 immunostaining to
identify macrophages ( Fig. 7 a). The number of macrophages in the
transplanted tissue was signi ﬁcantly increased in rats with the control
patch and decreased by 50% in the CE-SMC patch group ( Fig. 7 b). These
results suggest that the CE-SMC patch attenuated the immune response
during esophageal reconstruction.
4. Discussion
Cell alignment is critical for remodeling smooth muscle tissues,
including the structure of the vasculature wall, intestinal tissue, and
esophagus [ 50–52]; however, esophageal reconstruction by inducing
SMC alignment has not been reported [ 53]. In this study, CE was pro-
posed to guide cell alignment and elongation by generating aligned
cell-laden micro/nano ﬁbers. After CE, the electrospun MSCs and SMCs
exhibited high cell viability, alignment, and elongation along the elec-
trospun ﬁbers. Moreover, CE induced uniaxially arranged F-actin and
upregulated the expression levels of extracellular matrix proteins in
MSCs and SMCs compared to 3D bioprinting. These results suggest that
CE is a promising technique for manipulating cell elongation and align-
ment to mimic the anisotropic architecture of native tissues [ 54,55]. For
Fig. 3. Effects of cell printing (CP) and cell electrospinning (CE) on the arrangement of mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) and stem cell-derived smooth muscle c ells
(SMCs). (a) Phalloidin/DAPI staining on day 21 and quanti ﬁcation of the (b) F-actin aspect ratio and (c) F-actin orientation factor. (d) Fluorescence images of
ﬁbronectin, collagen I, and collagen IV on day 21 and (e) quanti ﬁcation of area. Data indicate mean /C6SD (n ¼3).M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
7instance, when an “artiﬁcial wound ”was covered with acellular elec-
trospun ﬁbers, SMCs successfully migrated to most of the wound area
along the direction of the ﬁbers [ 50]. These results suggest that a uni-
directional microenvironment is favorable for developing an engineered
smooth muscle patch that encourages ef ﬁcient cell-cell interactions and
an elongated morphology.
In addition, increased cytoskeletal and nuclear aspect ratios have
been reported as critical factors in facilitating MSC-to-SMC differentia-
tion, although the underlying mechanism by which biophysical micro-
environments affect SMC differentiation is not clearly understood [ 56].
Cell elongation in parallel or perpendicular direction is important to
SMCs in response to esophageal cycles for alleviating stress and prevent
cellular damages [ 57]. This typical perpendicular direction of SMCs to
strain was observed in esophageal tissues and named as hill-valley
pattern in a number of studies [ 58–61]. Because of similarity to native
esophageal structure and structural bene ﬁts, aligned nano ﬁbrous scaf-
folds have usually shown superior cell alignment and proliferation than
random nano ﬁbrous scaffolds [ 62]. In this study, aligned nano ﬁbrous
layers were deposited in ﬁve layers in the horizontal and vertical di-
rections, in which 10 cell layers (~300 μm) will give similar thickness to
native esophageal thickness (~270 μm) [ 63]. However, SMCdifferentiation was derived from various factors and veri ﬁed from
different aspects. Park et al. implanted randomly oriented PCL nano-
ﬁbrous and 3D printed patches with and without seeding MSCs in rat
esophagus [ 64]. Despite of preseeding MSCs, PCL nano ﬁbrous patches
revealed signi ﬁcantly increased esophagus thickness compared to 3D
printed patches owing to the presence of topographic guidance. Hou et al.
casted poly (ester urethane) scaffold using the silicon wafer with pattern
prototype 1 (PU1; 200 μm width and 30 μm wide with 30 μm depth wall)
and 2 (PU2; 100 μm width and discontinuous wall in 30 μm gap for each
100 μm channel with 30 μm depth) [ 65]. Then, for implantation into
rabbit esophagus, the scaffold was designed with PU1 on the exterior and
PU2 on the interior to mimic endocircular and exolongitunial architec-
ture. Primary SMCs showed higher growth and differentiation rate
compared to those on non-patterned scaffolds. Also, Kuppan et al. per-
formed electrospinning for generating random and aligned ﬁbrous scaf-
folds using PCL and PCL-gelatin blend. When SMCs were cultured on
each scaffold, PCL-gelatin-aligned ﬁbrous scaffolds revealed the highest
cell proliferation and functional gene expression level. Here, cell prolif-eration was dependent on alignment, but gene expression levels were
affected more by mechanical properties and chemical composition of
scaffolds [ 66]. These former studies well support the ﬁndings of this
Fig. 4. Cell electrospinning (CE) promotes a higher degree of maturation of stem cell-derived smooth muscle cells (SMCs) than cell printing (CP). (a) α-SMA/DAPI
staining on day 21 and quanti ﬁcation of the (b) alpha smooth muscle actin ( α-SMA) aspect ratio and (c) α-SMA orientation factor. (d) Calponin/DAPI staining on day
21 and (e) analysis of relative smooth muscle-speci ﬁc gene expression. GAPDH was used to normalize gene expression. Data indicate mean /C6SD (n ¼3).M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
8Fig. 5. Fabrication process and transplantation of a stem cell-derived smooth muscle cell (SMC)-patch to repair esophageal wound in a rat model. (a) Schemat ic
illustration of polycaprolactone (PCL)-electrospinning and SMC-laden electrospinning for developing a cell electrospinning (CE)-SMC patch. (b ) Representative images
of the surgical procedure in which the CE-SMC patch was transplanted into the esophageal wound rat model. Images of (c) H &E staining and (d) Masson's trichrome
staining of the defective esophagus at 2 weeks after transplantation of either an SMC or cell-free patch and normal esophagus. Representative data fr om two inde-
pendent experiments are shown. (Normal, without surgery; Control-Patch, cell-free construct; SMC-Patch, SMC-laden construct).M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
9study that the combination of aligned topography and TGF- βtreatment
signiﬁcantly enhanced cell proliferation and SMC-speci ﬁc gene
expression.
In another aspect of SMC differentiation, MSCs have shown a greatertendency to differentiate into SMCs on stiff substrates (90 –1500 kPa)
[67]. Hence, MSCs cultured on stiff substrates demonstrated increased
calponin expression levels compared to MSCs cultured on soft substrates
[43]. Additionally, the synergistic effects of a stiff surface and aligned
Fig. 6. Neovascularization and regeneration of esophageal smooth muscles after patch transplantation in an esophageal wound model. Representative image s of (a)
vimentin, (c) ILB4 and SM22 αimmunostaining in an esophageal wound model at 2 weeks after transplantation of either a stem cell-derived smooth muscle cell (SMC)
or cell-free patch and normal esophagus. Quanti ﬁcation of (b) vimentin and (d) SM22 αexpression as measured by the ﬂuorescence levels. (e) Quanti ﬁcation of the
number of ILB4 and SM22 αdouble-positive cells. Data indicate mean /C6SD (n ¼6). (Normal, without surgery; Control-Patch, cell-free construct; SMC-Patch, SMC-
laden construct).
Fig. 7. Regulation of in ﬂammation in esophageal
tissues after stem cell-derived smooth muscle cell
(SMC)-patch transplantation in an esophageal woundmodel. (a) Representative images of CD68 immuno-
staining in an esophageal wound model at 2 weeks
after transplantation of either an SMC or cell-freepatch and normal esophagus. (b) Quanti ﬁcation of
macrophage in ﬁltration in esophageal tissues by
counting the number of DAPI and CD68 double-
positive cells. Data indicate mean /C6SD (n ¼6).
(Normal, without surgery; Control-Patch, cell-free
construct; SMC-Patch, SMC-laden construct).M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
10topographical cues can alter mechanical deformations (nuclear and
cytoskeletal elongation) in cellular biochemical responses [ 68], which, in
turn, can affect cellular functions and transcriptional activities [ 69]. In
this study, alginate ﬁbers exhibited a Young's modulus of 116 /C63 kPa
and a maximum strength of 3.5 /C60.5 MPa. These results suggest that
cells seeded on electrospun ﬁbers preferentially differentiate into SMCs,
owing to the appropriate mechanical properties and anisotropic cues.
Moreover, CE-SMC exhibited an increased number of cells compared
with the other groups. Although the molecular mechanisms involved in
the increased proliferation of CE-SMC remain unclear, it is likely that
aligned topographic cues may promote the proliferation of CE-SMCs.
TGF- βhas been widely used to induce differentiation of MSCs into
SMCs [ 70]. TGF- β-treated MSCs exhibit SMC-like phenotypes but may
also become myoblast, adipogenic, or osteogenic cells depending on
environmental factors [ 70,71]. Both α-SMA and calponin are key markers
of an SMC-like population because α-SMA is expressed early in SMC
development, whereas calponin is expressed exclusively in smooth
muscle cells at the later stages of MSC-to-SMC differentiation. We found
thatα-SMA and calponin expression was dispersed in CP-SMC, but not all
cells became SMCs. However, these proteins were highly expressed in
CE-SMCs. In addition, the expression levels of contractile markers ( CX43 ,
SM22 α, desmin, and SMTN ) were signi ﬁcantly increased in CE-SMCs in
response to TGF- β, indicating that these cells were in the later stages of
SMC differentiation [ 43,44].
As the esophageal tissue structure enables peristalsis, the contractile
phenotype is a critical factor in assessing the potential to restorecontraction and relaxation following esophageal injury. Our results
indicate that a ﬁbrous structure can serve not only as a mechanical
support but also provide biophysical and biochemical cues. Esophageal
injury can be caused by various factors, such as in ﬂammation, ulcers,
stenosis, cancer, or physical impact [ 72]. and in severe cases, an injury
can cause esophageal wounds. Small defects, perforation, and rupture of
the esophagus are treated with sutures; however, if the defect is large,
tissue transplantation is required. However, a practical method for
effectively treating and regenerating the esophagus through tissue
transplantation has not yet been developed. Consequently, many re-
searchers have studied esophageal reconstruction through trans-
plantation of tissue scaffolds made from MSCs [ 73–75]. In this study, we
transplanted the CE-SMC patch into an esophageal wound model to
evaluate its clinical applicability. Although the SMC scaffold was not
transplanted into the esophagus in the form of a tube, but as a patch on a
small wound area created by punching, we suggest an SMC-laden
construct fabricated using CE as a useful method for esophageal recon-
struction. In addition, PCL has long-term stability against biodegradation
by hydrolysis, and it takes more than 2 years to completely degrade [ 76],
implying the usefulness of PCL in CE-mediated tissue engineering. In
H&E staining and cytokeratin 14 immunostaining, the esophagus has an
inner mucosal layer and an outer muscular layer that are mainly
composed of epithelium, suggesting recruitment of esophageal epithelial
cells into the wounds. Although epithelial cells were not used for elec-
trospinning in this study, the tissue transplantation and regenerative
potential of the CE-SMC scaffolds were demonstrated. In future studies,
we will aim to fabricate CE scaffolds using SMCs and epithelial cells for
transplantation into small and large esophageal wounds to con ﬁrm
functional tissue repair, potentially expanding the therapeutic and clin-
ical signi ﬁcance of SMCs.
5. Conclusions
This study presents a novel approach to cell alignment and MSC-to-
SMC differentiation via CE. Prior to CE, MSCs were treated with TGF- β
as a regulatory factor of SMC differentiation, which ef ﬁciently yielded
MSC-derived SMCs, as indicated by the enhanced expression levels of
SMC-speci ﬁc markers (calponin,
αSMA, SM22 α, vimentin, desmin, and
SMTN). Then, CE was performed using either MSCs or SMCs, and both
cell types showed high cell viability ( >90%). CP using MSCs or SMCs wascompared as a control; speci ﬁcally, electrospun SMCs (CE-SMCs)
exhibited signi ﬁcantly elongated and aligned cytoskeletal structures
represented by F-actin, ﬁbronectin, collagen I, and collagen IV, which
grew along the uniaxially deposited ﬁber direction. Additionally, the
expression levels of SMC-speci ﬁc markers ( CX43 ,SM22 α, desmin, and
SMTN ) were signi ﬁcantly increased in CE-SMCs. When the CE-SMC
scaffold was applied as a patch on a defective rat esophagus, an
improved regenerative process was observed in terms of increased newly
formed blood vessels and SM22 αand vimentin expression levels. These
results suggest the potential of CE as a therapeutic approach for the
regeneration of smooth muscle tissues.
Consent for publication
All authors have read and agreed to publish this manuscript.
Ethics approval and consent to participate
All animal experiments were reviewed and approved by the Institu-
tional Review Board of the Pusan National University Hospital (PNUH-
2021-188). Human palatine tonsil tissues were isolated from the patients
after obtaining written informed consent. The study was approved by the
Institutional Review Board of Pusan National University Hospital (1801-
033-062).
Funding
This study was supported by the MRC program (NRF-
2022R1A5A2027161) and grants from the National Research Foundation
of Korea (NRF) funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT for the Bio-
inspired Innovation Technology Development Project (NRF-
2018M3C1B7021997) and the Korean Fund for Regenerative Medi-
cine(KFRM) grant funded by the Ministry of Science and ICT, the Min-
istry of Health &Welfare (RS-2022-00070304), Republic of Korea.
Credit author statement
Miji Yeo: Conceptualization, Methodology, Investigation, Writing –
original draft. Jung Won Yoon: Data curation, Formal analysis, Meth-
odology, Writing –original draft. Gyu Tae Park: Data curation, Formal
analysis, Methodology. Sung-Chan Shin: Formal analysis, Investigation,
Methodology. Young-Cheol Song: Formal analysis, Investigation, Meth-
odology. Yong-Il Cheon: Formal analysis, Investigation, Methodology.
Byung-Joo Lee: Data curation, Formal analysis, Investigation. Geun
Hyung Kim: Conceptualization, Funding acquisition, Methodology,
Writing –review &editing, Supervision. Jae Ho Kim: Conceptualization,
Funding acquisition, Methodology, Writing –review &editing,
Supervision.
Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing ﬁnancial
interests or personal relationships that could have appeared to in ﬂuence
the work reported in this paper.
Data availability
Data will be made available on request.
Acknowledgements
We would like to thank Yoon Ji Jung for technical assistance and Prof.
Suck Won Hong (Pusan National University) for discussions that greatly
improved the manuscript.M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
11Appendix A. Supplementary data
Supplementary data to this article can be found online at https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.mtbio.2023.100564 .
Abbreviations
α-SMA Alpha-smooth muscle actin
CE Cell electrospinning
CP Cell printing
DAPI 40,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole
ECM Extracellular matrix
MSCs Mesenchymal stem cells
SMCs Smooth muscle cells
TGF- β1 Transforming growth factor- β1
References
[1] F. Schlottmann, M.G. Patti, Primary esophageal motility disorders: beyond
achalasia, Int. J. Mol. Sci. 18 (7) (2017) 1399, https://doi.org/10.3390/
ijms18071399 .
[2] R. Londono, S.F. Badylak, Regenerative medicine strategies for esophageal repair,
Tissue Eng. B Rev. 21 (4) (2015) 393 –410, https://doi.org/10.1089/
ten.teb.2015.0014 .
[3] L. Arakelian, N. Kanai, K. Dua, M. Durand, P. Cattan, T. Ohki, Esophageal tissue
engineering: from bench to bedside, Ann. N. Y. Acad. Sci. 1434 (1) (2018) 156 –163,
https://doi.org/10.1111/nyas.13951 .
[4] M.F. Pittenger, D.E. Discher, B.M. P /C19eault, D.G. Phinney, J.M. Hare, A.I. Caplan,
Mesenchymal stem cell perspective: cell biology to clinical progress, NPJ Regen.Med. 4 (1) (2019) 1 –15,https://doi.org/10.1038/s41536-019-0083-6 .
[5] M.F. Pittenger, A.M. Mackay, S.C. Beck, R.K. Jaiswal, R. Douglas, J.D. Mosca,
M.A. Moorman, D.W. Simonetti, S. Craig, D.R. Marshak, Multilineage potential of
adult human mesenchymal stem cells, Science 284 (5411) (1999) 143 –147, https://
doi.org/10.1126/science.284.5411.143 .
[6] B. Ohlstein, T. Kai, E. Decotto, A. Spradling, The stem cell niche: theme and
variations, Curr. Opin. Cell Biol. 16 (6) (2004) 693 –699, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.ceb.2004.09.003 .
[7] K. Kurpinski, H. Lam, J. Chu, A. Wang, A. Kim, E. Tsay, S. Agrawal, D.V. Schaffer,
S. Li, Transforming growth factor-beta and notch signaling mediate stem cell
differentiation into smooth muscle cells, Stem Cell. 28 (4) (2010) 734 –742, https://
doi.org/10.1002/stem.319 .
[8] S. Chen, R.J. Lechleider, Transforming growth factor-beta-induced differentiation of
smooth muscle from a neural crest stem cell line, Circ. Res. 94 (9) (2004)
1195 –1202, https://doi.org/10.1161/01.RES.0000126897.41658.81 .
[9] W.S. Park, S.C. Heo, E.S. Jeon, D.H. Hong, Y.K. Son, J.H. Ko, H.K. Kim, S.Y. Lee,
J.H. Kim, J. Han, Functional expression of smooth muscle-speci ﬁc ion channels in
TGF-beta(1)-treated human adipose-derived mesenchymal stem cells, Am. J.
Physiol. Cell Physiol. 305 (4) (2013) C377 –C391, https://doi.org/10.1152/
ajpcell.00404.2012 .
[10] C.Y. Tay, Y.L. Wu, P. Cai, N.S. Tan, S.S. Venkatraman, X. Chen, L.P. Tan, Bio-
inspired micropatterned hydrogel to direct and deconstruct hierarchical processing
of geometry-force signals by human mesenchymal stem cells during smooth muscle
cell differentiation, NPG Asia Mater. 7 (7) (2015), https://doi.org/10.1038/
am.2015.66 e199-e199.
[11] A. Tijore, J.M. Behr, S.A. Irvine, V. Baisane, S. Venkatraman, Bioprinted gelatin
hydrogel platform promotes smooth muscle cell contractile phenotype
maintenance, Biomed. Microdevices 20 (2) (2018) 1 –10,https://doi.org/10.1007/
s10544-018-0274-8 .
[12] Q. Zhou, J. Xie, M. Bao, H. Yuan, Z. Ye, X. Lou, Y. Zhang, Engineering aligned
electrospun PLLA micro ﬁbers with nano-porous surface nanotopography for
modulating the responses of vascular smooth muscle cells, J. Mater. Chem. B (2015)
4439 –4450. https://10.1039/C5TB00051C .
[13] A. Jiao, N.E. Trosper, H.S. Yang, J. Kim, J.H. Tsui, S.D. Frankel, C.E. Murry,
D.H. Kim, Thermoresponsive nanofabricated substratum for the engineering of
three-dimensional tissues with layer-by-layer architectural control, ACS Nano 8 (5)(2014) 4430 –4439, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn4063962 .
[14] S.J. Kim, H.R. Cho, K.W. Cho, S. Qiao, J.S. Rhim, M. Soh, T. Kim, M.K. Choi,
C. Choi, I. Park, N.S. Hwang, Multifunctional cell-culture platform for aligned cell
sheet monitoring, transfer printing, and therapy, ACS Nano 9 (3) (2015)2677 –2688, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn5064634 .
[15] E. Ngandu Mpoyi, M. Cantini, P.M. Reynolds, N. Gadegaard, M.J. Dalby,
M. Salmer /C19on-S /C19anchez, Protein adsorption as a key mediator in the
nanotopographical control of cell behavior, ACS Nano 10 (7) (2016) 6638 –6647,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsnano.6b01649 .
[16] A. Agrawal, B.H. Lee, S.A. Irvine, J. An, R. Bhuthalingam, V. Singh, K.Y. Low,
C.K. Chua, S.S. Venkatraman, Smooth muscle cell alignment and phenotype control
by melt spun polycaprolactone ﬁbers for seeding of tissue engineered blood vessels,
Int. J. Biomater. 2015 (2015), https://doi.org/10.1155/2015/434876 .
[17] J. Huang, Y. Chen, C. Tang, Y. Fei, H. Wu, D. Ruan, M.E. Paul, X. Chen, Z. Yin,
B.C. Heng, W. Chen, The relationship between substrate topography and stem celldifferentiation in the musculoskeletal system, Cell. Mol. Life Sci. 76 (3) (2019)
505–521, https://doi.org/10.1007/s00018-018-2945-2 .
[18] B.K.K. Teo, S.T. Wong, C.K. Lim, T.Y. Kung, C.H. Yap, Y. Ramagopal, L.H. Romer,
E.K. Yim, Nanotopography modulates mechanotransduction of stem cells and
induces differentiation through focal adhesion kinase, ACS Nano 7 (6) (2013)
4785 –4798, https://doi.org/10.1021/nn304966z .
[19] S. Jana, S.K. Levengood, M. Zhang, Anisotropic materials for skeletal-muscle-tissue
engineering, Adv. Mater. 28 (48) (2016) 10588 –10612, https://doi.org/10.1002/
adma.201600240 .
[20] S.H. Cha, H.J. Lee, W.G. Koh, Study of myoblast differentiation using multi-
dimensional scaffolds consisting of nano and micropatterns, Biomater. Res. 21 (1)(2017) 1 –9,https://doi.org/10.1186/s40824-016-0087-x .
[21] E.K. Yim, R.M. Reano, S.W. Pang, A.F. Yee, C.S. Chen, K.W. Leong, Nanopattern-
induced changes in morphology and motility of smooth muscle cells, Biomaterials
26 (26) (2005) 5405 –5413, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.01.058 .
[22] A. Parandakh, A. Anbarlou, M. Tafazzoli-Shadpour, A. Ardeshirylajimi, M.M. Khani,
Substrate topography interacts with substrate stiffness and culture time to regulate
mechanical properties and smooth muscle differentiation of mesenchymal stemcells, Colloids Surf. B Biointerfaces 173 (2019) 194 –201, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.colsurfb.2018.09.066 .
[23] S. Abolhasani, M. Rajabibazl, M.M. Khani, A. Parandakh, R. Hoseinpoor, The
cooperative effects of micro-grooved topography and TGF-beta1 on the vascular
smooth muscle cell contractile protein expression of the mesenchymal stem cells,Differentiation 115 (2020) 22 –29,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.diff.2020.06.003 .
[24] X. Zhou, M. Nowicki, H. Sun, S.Y. Hann, H. Cui, T. Esworthy, J.D. Lee, M. Plesniak,
L.G. Zhang, 3D Bioprinting-tunable small-diameter blood vessels with biomimetic
biphasic cell layers, ACS Appl. Mater. Interfaces 12 (41) (2020) 45904 –45915,
https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.0c14871 .
[25] H. Cui, W. Zhu, Y. Huang, C. Liu, Z.X. Yu, M. Nowicki, S. Miao, Y. Cheng, X. Zhou,
S.J. Lee, Y. Zhou, In vitro and in vivo evaluation of 3D bioprinted small-diametervasculature with smooth muscle and endothelium, Biofabrication 12 (1) (2019),
015004, https://doi.org/10.1088/1758-5090/ab402c .
[26] J. Xue, T. Wu, Y. Dai, Y. Xia, Electrospinning and electrospun nano ﬁbers: methods,
materials, and applications, Chem. Rev. 119 (8) (2019) 5298 –5415, https://
doi.org/10.1021/acs.chemrev.8b00593 .
[27] C. Norioka, Y. Inamoto, C. Hajime, A. Kawamura, T. Miyata, A universal method to
easily design tough and stretchable hydrogels, NPG Asia Mater. 13 (1) (2021) 1 –10,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41427-021-00302-2
.
[28] S.L. Sampson, L. Saraiva, K. Gustafsson, S.N. Jayasinghe, B.D. Robertson, Cell
electrospinning: an in vitro and in vivo study, Small 10 (1) (2014) 78 –82,https://
doi.org/10.1002/smll.201300804 .
[29] E. Ehler, S.N. Jayasinghe, Cell electrospinning cardiac patches for tissue
engineering the heart, Analyst 139 (18) (2014) 4449 –4452. https://10.1039/C
4AN00766B .
[30] M. Yeo, G. Kim, Fabrication of cell-laden electrospun hybrid scaffolds of alginate-
based bioink and PCL microstructures for tissue regeneration, Chem. Eng. J. 275
(2015) 27 –35,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cej.2015.04.038 .
[31] H. Chen, Y. Liu, Q. Hu, A novel bioactive membrane by cell electrospinning, Exp.
Cell Res. 338 (2) (2015) 261 –266, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yexcr.2015.08.007 .
[32] M. Yeo, G.H. Kim, Anisotropically aligned cell-laden nano ﬁbrous bundle fabricated
via cell electrospinning to regenerate skeletal muscle tissue, Small 14 (48) (2018),
1803491, https://doi.org/10.1002/smll.201803491 .
[33] M. Yeo, G. Kim, Micro/nano-hierarchical scaffold fabricated using a cell
electrospinning/3D printing process for co-culturing myoblasts and HUVECs toinduce myoblast alignment and differentiation, Acta Biomater. 107 (2020)
102–114, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actbio.2020.02.042 .
[34] M. Zhuravleva, Z. Gilazieva, T.E. Grigoriev, A.D. Shepelev, T. Kh Tenchurin,
R. Kamyshinsky, S.V. Krasheninnikov, S. Orlov, G. Caralogli, S. Archipova,
M.J. Holterman, In vitro assessment of electrospun polyamide-6 scaffolds foresophageal tissue engineering, J. Biomed. Mater. Res. Part B Appl. Biomater. 107
(2) (2019) 253 –268, https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.b.34116 .
[35] B. Wu, N. Takeshita, Y. Wu, S. Vijayavenkataraman, K.Y. Ho, W.F. Lu, J.Y.H. Fuh,
Pluronic F127 blended polycaprolactone scaffolds via e-jetting for esophageal tissue
engineering, J. Mater. Sci. Mater. Med. 29 (9) (2018) 1 –12,https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10856-018-6148-z .
[36] S.C. Shin, Y. Seo, H.Y. Park, D.W. Jung, T.H. Shin, H. Son, Y.K. Kim, J.C. Lee,
E.S. Sung, J.Y. Jang, H.S. Kim, Regenerative potential of tonsil mesenchymal stem
cells on surgical cutaneous defect, Cell Death Dis. 9 (2) (2018) 1 –12,https://
doi.org/10.1038/s41419-017-0248-4 .
[37] G.C. Park, J.S. Song, H.Y. Park, S.C. Shin, J.Y. Jang, J.C. Lee, S.G. Wang, B.J. Lee,
J.S. Jung, Role of ﬁbroblast growth factor-5 on the proliferation of human tonsil-
derived mesenchymal stem cells, Stem Cell. Dev. 25 (15) (2016) 1149 –1160,
https://doi.org/10.1089/scd.2016.0061 .
[38] J. Brun, K.A. Lutz, K.M. Neumayer, G. Klein, T. Seeger, T. Uynuk-Ool, K. W €org€otter,
S. Schmid, U. Kraushaar, E. Guenther, B. Rolauffs, Smooth muscle-like cells
generated from human mesenchymal stromal cells display marker gene expressionand electrophysiological competence comparable to bladder smooth muscle cells,
PLoS One 10 (12) (2015), e0145153, https://doi.org/10.1371/
journal.pone.0145153 .
[39] S. Chang, S. Song, J. Lee, J. Yoon, J. Park, S. Choi, J.K. Park, K. Choi, C. Choi,
Phenotypic modulation of primary vascular smooth muscle cells by short-term
culture on micropatterned substrate, PLoS One 9 (2) (2014), e88089, https://
doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0088089 .
[40] G. Kim, K.E. Park, Alginate-nano ﬁbers fabricated by an electrohydrodynamic
process, Polym. Eng. Sci. 49 (11) (2009) 2242 –2248, https://doi.org/10.1002/
pen.21472 .M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
12[41] C.A. Bonino, M.D. Krebs, C.D. Saquing, S.I. Jeong, K.L. Shearer, E. Alsberg,
S.A. Khan, Electrospinning alginate-based nano ﬁbers: from blends to crosslinked
low molecular weight alginate-only systems, Carbohydr. Polym. 85 (1) (2011)
111–119, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.carbpol.2011.02.002 .
[42] S. Huang, P. Chen, X. Shui, Y. He, H. Wang, J. Zheng, L. Zhang, J. Li, Y. Xue,
C. Chen, W. Lei, Baicalin attenuates transforming growth factor- β1-induced human
pulmonary artery smooth muscle cell proliferation and phenotypic switch by
inhibiting hypoxia inducible factor-1 αand aryl hydrocarbon receptor expression,
J. Pharm. Pharmacol. 66 (10) (2014) 1469 –1477, https://doi.org/10.1111/
jphp.12273 .
[43] A.P. Rickel, H.J. Sanyour, N.A. Leyda, Z. Hong, Extracellular matrix proteins and
substrate stiffness synergistically regulate vascular smooth muscle cell migration
and cortical cytoskeleton organization, ACS Appl. Bio Mater. 3 (4) (2020)
2360 –2369, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsabm.0c00100 .
[44] J.S. Weinbaum, J. Qi, R.T. Tranquillo, Monitoring collagen transcription by vascular
smooth muscle cells in ﬁbrin-based tissue constructs, Tissue Eng. C Methods 16 (3)
(2010) 459 –467, https://doi.org/10.1089/ten.tec.2009.0112 .
[45] J. Wang, R. Zohar, C.A. McCulloch, Multiple roles of α-smooth muscle actin in
mechanotransduction, Exp. Cell Res. 312 (3) (2006) 205 –214, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.yexcr.2005.11.004 .
[46] S. Soliman, S. Sant, J.W. Nichol, M. Khabiry, E. Traversa, A. Khademhosseini,
Controlling the porosity of ﬁbrous scaffolds by modulating the ﬁber diameter and
packing density, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 96 (3) (2011) 566 –574, https://
doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.33010 .
[47] L. Moroni, R. Licht, J. de Boer, J.R. de Wijn, C.A. van Blitterswijk, Fiber diameter
and texture of electrospun PEOT/PBT scaffolds in ﬂuence human mesenchymal stem
cell proliferation and morphology, and the release of incorporated compounds,
Biomaterials 27 (28) (2006) 4911 –4922, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2006.05.027 .
[48] C.A. Bashur, L.A. Dahlgren, A.S. Goldstein, Effect of ﬁber diameter and orientation
onﬁbroblast morphology and proliferation on electrospun poly (D, L-lactic-co-
glycolic acid) meshes, Biomaterials 27 (33) (2006) 5681 –5688, https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.biomaterials.2006.07.005 .
[49] P. Maghsoudlou, S. Eaton, P. De Coppi, Tissue engineering of the esophagus, in:
Seminars in Pediatric Surgery, Elsevier, Philadelphia, 2014, pp. 127 –134.
[50] B. Yi, Y. Shen, H. Tang, X. Wang, B. Li, Y. Zhang, Stiffness of aligned ﬁbers regulates
the phenotypic expression of vascular smooth muscle cells, ACS Appl. Mater.
Interfaces (7) (2019) 6867 –6880, https://doi.org/10.1021/acsami.9b00293 .
[51] Y. Chen, C. Guo, E. Manousiouthakis, X. Wang, D.M. Cairns, T.T. Roh, C. Du,
D.L. Kaplan, Bi-layered tubular micro ﬁber scaffolds as functional templates for
engineering human intestinal smooth muscle tissue, Adv. Funct. Mater. 30 (17)
(2020), 2000543, https://doi.org/10.1002/adfm.202000543 .
[52] E.J. Chung, H.W. Ju, Y.K. Yeon, J.S. Lee, Y.J. Lee, Y.B. Seo, P. Chan Hum,
Development of an omentum-cultured oesophageal scaffold reinforced by a 3D-
printed ring: feasibility of an in vivo bioreactor, Artif. Cell Nanomed. Biotechnol. 46
(sup1) (2018) 885 –895, https://doi.org/10.1080/21691401.2018.1439039 .
[53] S.Y. Park, J.W. Choi, J.K. Park, E.H. Song, S.A. Park, Y.S. Kim, Y.S. Shin, C.H. Kim,
Tissue-engineered arti ﬁcial oesophagus patch using three-dimensionally printed
polycaprolactone with mesenchymal stem cells: a preliminary report, Interact.
Cardiovasc. Thorac. Surg. 22 (6) (2016) 712 –717, https://doi.org/10.1093/icvts/
ivw048 .
[54] R.G. Thakar, Q. Cheng, S. Patel, J. Chu, M. Nasir, D. Liepmann, K. Komvopoulos,
S. Li, Cell-shape regulation of smooth muscle cell proliferation, Biophys. J. 96 (8)
(2009) 3423 –3432, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.bpj.2008.11.074 .
[55] E.K. Yim, R.M. Reano, S.W. Pang, A.F. Yee, C.S. Chen, K.W. Leong, Nanopattern-
induced changes in morphology and motility of smooth muscle cells, Biomaterials
26 (26) (2005) 5405 –5413, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2005.01.058 .
[56] Y.T. Yeh, J. Wei, S. Thorossian, K. Nguyen, C. Hoffman, J.C. Del /C19Alamo, R. Serrano,
Y.S.J. Li, K.C. Wang, S. Chien, MiR-145 mediates cell morphology-regulated
mesenchymal stem cell differentiation to smooth muscle cells, Biomaterials 204
(2019) 59 –69,https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biomaterials.2019.03.003 .
[57] A.C. Ritchie, S. Wijaya, W.F. Ong, S.P. Zhong, K.S. Chian, Dependence of alignment
direction on magnitude of strain in esophageal smooth muscle cells, Biotechnol,
Bioeng 102 (6) (2009) 1703 –1711, https://doi.org/10.1002/bit.22190 .
[58] J.M. Cha, S.N. Park, S.H. Noh, H. Suh, Time-dependent modulation of alignment
and differentiation of smooth muscle cells seeded on a porous substrate undergoingcyclic mechanical strain, Artif. Organs 30 (4) (2006) 250 –258, https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1525-1594.2006.00212.x .
[59] J.H. Haga, Y.-S.J. Li, S. Chien, Molecular basis of the effects of mechanical stretch
on vascular smooth muscle cells, J. Biomech. 40 (5) (2007) 947 –960, https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2006.04.011 .
[60] K. Hayakawa, N. Sato, T. Obinata, Dynamic reorientation of cultured cells and stress
ﬁbers under mechanical stress from periodic stretching, Exp. Cell Res. 268 (1)
(2001) 104 –114.
[61] K. Kanda, T. Matsuda, T. Oka, Mechanical stress induced cellular orientation and
phenotypic modulation of 3-D cultured smooth muscle cells, Am. Soc. Artif. Intern.
Organs J. 39 (3) (1993) M686 –M690 .
[62] A. Subramanian, U.M. Krishnan, S. Sethuraman, Fabrication, characterization and
in vitro evaluation of aligned PLGA –PCL nano ﬁbers for neural regeneration, Ann.
Biomed. Eng. 40 (10) (2012) 2098 –2110, https://doi.org/10.1007/s10439-012-
0592-6 .
[63] B.E. Bouma, G.J. Tearney, C.C. Compton, N.S. Nishioka, High-resolution imaging of
the human esophagus and stomach in vivo using optical coherence tomography,
Gastrointest. Endosc. 51 (4) (2000) 467 –474, https://doi.org/10.1016/S0016-
5107(00)70449-4 .
[64] H. Park, I.G. Kim, Y. Wu, H. Cho, J.W. Shin, S.A. Park, E.J. Chung, Experimental
investigation of esophageal reconstruction with electrospun polyurethane nano ﬁber
and 3D printing polycaprolactone scaffolds using a rat model, Head Neck 43 (3)
(2021) 833 –848, https://doi.org/10.1002/hed.26540 .
[65] L. Hou, C. Gong, Y. Zhu, In vitro construction and in vivo regeneration of
esophageal bilamellar muscle tissue, J. Biomater. Appl. 30 (9) (2016) 1373 –1384,
https://doi.org/10.1177/0885328215627585 .
[66] P. Kuppan, S. Sethuraman, U.M. Krishnan, Interaction of human smooth muscle
cells with nano ﬁbrous scaffolds: effect of ﬁber orientation on cell adhesion,
proliferation, and functional gene expression, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A 103 (7)
(2015) 2236 –2250, https://doi.org/10.1002/jbm.a.35360 .
[67] J.S. Park, J.S. Chu, A.D. Tsou, R. Diop, Z. Tang, A. Wang, S. Li, The effect of matrix
stiffness on the differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells in response to TGF- β,
Biomaterials 32 (16) (2011) 3921 –3930, https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.biomaterials.2011.02.019 .
[68] D.E. Ingber, Tensegrity: the architectural basis of cellular mechanotransduction,
Annu. Rev. Physiol. 59 (1) (1997) 575 –599. https://10.1146/annurev.physiol.59.1.
575.
[69] N. Wang, J.D. Tytell, D.E. Ingber, Mechanotransduction at a distance: mechanically
coupling the extracellular matrix with the nucleus, Nat. Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 10 (1)
(2009) 75 –82,https://doi.org/10.1038/nrm2594 .
[70] Y. Liu, B. Deng, Y. Zhao, S. Xie, R. Nie, Differentiated markers in undifferentiated
cells: expression of smooth muscle contractile proteins in multipotent bone marrowmesenchymal stem cells, Dev. Growth Differ. 55 (5) (2013) 591 –605, https://
doi.org/10.1111/dgd.12052 .
[71] N.P. Talele, J. Fradette, J.E. Davies, A. Kapus, B. Hinz, Expression of
α-smooth
muscle actin determines the fate of mesenchymal stromal cells, Stem Cell Rep. 4 (6)
(2015) 1016 –1030 .
[72] J.B. Zwischenberger, C. Savage, A. Bidani, Surgical aspects of esophageal disease:
perforation and caustic injury, Am. J. Respir. Crit. Care Med. 165 (8) (2002)
1037 –1040, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.stemcr.2015.05.004 .
[73] J. Catry, M. Luong-Nguyen, L. Arakelian, T. Poghosyan, P. Bruneval, T. Domet,
L. Michaud, R. Sfeir, F. Gottrand, J. Larghero, V. Vanneaux, Circumferential
esophageal replacement by a tissue-engineered substitute using mesenchymal stem
cells: an experimental study in mini pigs, Cell Transplant. 26 (12) (2017)1831 –1839, https://doi.org/10.1177/0963689717741498 .
[74] H. Park, I.G. Kim, Y. Wu, H. Cho, J.W. Shin, S.A. Park, E.J. Chung, Experimental
investigation of esophageal reconstruction with electrospun polyurethane nano ﬁber
and 3D printing polycaprolactone scaffolds using a rat model, Head Neck 43 (3)
(2021) 833 –848, https://doi.org/10.1002/hed.26540 .
[75] I.G. Kim, Y. Wu, S.A. Park, H. Cho, J.J. Choi, S.K. Kwon, J.W. Shin, E.J. Chung,
Tissue-engineered esophagus via bioreactor cultivation for circumferential
esophageal reconstruction, Tissue Eng. 25 (21 –22) (2019) 1478 –1492, https://
doi.org/10.1089/ten.tea.2018.0277 .
[76] S. Sanchez-Gonzalez, N. Diban, A. Urtiaga, Hydrolytic degradation and mechanical
stability of poly(epsilon-caprolactone)/reduced graphene oxide membranes as
scaffolds for in vitro neural tissue regeneration, Membranes 8 (1) (2018) 12,
https://doi.org/10.3390/membranes8010012 .M. Yeo et al. Materials Today Bio 19 (2023) 100564
13