UCLA
UCLA Previously Published Works
Title
Bioinks for 3D bioprinting: an overview
Permalink
https://escholarship.org/uc/item/4520s2n6
Journal
Biomaterials Science, 6(5)
ISSN
2047-4830
Authors
Gungor-Ozkerim, P Selcan
Inci, Ilyas
Zhang, Yu Shrike
et al.
Publication Date
2018-05-01
DOI
10.1039/c7bm00765e
 
Peer reviewed
eScholarship.org Powered by the California Digital Library
University of CaliforniaBiomaterials
Science
REVIEW
Cite this: DOI: 10.1039/c7bm00765e
Received 22nd August 2017,
Accepted 12th January 2018
DOI: 10.1039/c7bm00765e
rsc.li/biomaterials-scienceBioinks for 3D bioprinting: an overview
P. Selcan Gungor-Ozkerim, †a,b,cIlyas Inci,
 †a,bYu Shrike Zhang,
 †a,b,d
Ali Khademhosseini
a,b,d,e,f,g,h,i,jand Mehmet Remzi Dokmeci
 *a,b,d,e,f
Bioprinting is an emerging technology with various applications in making functional tissue constructs to
replace injured or diseased tissues. It is a relatively new approach that provides high reproducibility and
precise control over the fabricated constructs in an automated manner, potentially enabling high-
throughput production. During the bioprinting process, a solution of a biomaterial or a mixture of severalbiomaterials in the hydrogel form, usually encapsulating the desired cell types, termed the bioink, is used
for creating tissue constructs. This bioink can be cross-linked or stabilized during or immediately after
bioprinting to generate the ﬁnal shape, structure, and architecture of the designed construct. Bioinks may
be made from natural or synthetic biomaterials alone, or a combination of the two as hybrid materials. In
certain cases, cell aggregates without any additional biomaterials can also be adopted for use as a bioink
for bioprinting processes. An ideal bioink should possess proper mechanical, rheological, and biologicalproperties of the target tissues, which are essential to ensure correct functionality of the bioprinted
tissues and organs. In this review, we provide an in-depth discussion of the di ﬀerent bioinks currently
employed for bioprinting, and outline some future perspectives in their further development.
1. Introduction
Biofabrication is an emerging research area and includes the
creation of tissue constructs with a hierarchical architecture.Conventional biofabrication techniques include, for example,
particulate leaching, freeze-drying, electrospinning, and micro-
engineering.
1Although these techniques can all generatethree-dimensional (3D) structures with a wide range of bioma-
terials, they typically possess limited reproducibility and versa-
tility in their fabrication procedures. The most recent defi-
nition of biofabrication is the generation of biologically func-tional products in an automated manner with structural
organization by using bioactive molecules, living cells, and cell
aggregates, such as micro-tissues, biomaterials, or hybrid cell-material constructs viabioassembly or bioprinting, and sub-
sequent tissue maturation processes.
2More recently, 3D bio-
printing has emerged as a novel biofabrication method,oﬀering significantly improved control over the architecture of
the fabricated tissue constructs with high reproducibility
endowed by the automated deposition process.
3–5Essentially,
bioprinting allows for the fabrication of 3D tissue constructs
with pre-programmed structures and geometries containing
biomaterials and/or living cells (together termed the bioink)by synchronizing the bioink deposition/cross-linking with the
motorized stage movement. Although bioprinting is still in its
early developmental stages, its versatility has continued toaccelerate the applications in tissue engineering.
6
The main 3D bioprinting modalities (Fig. 1),3in general
can be classified as: laser-assisted bioprinting (LaBP), inkjetbioprinting/droplet bioprinting, and extrusion-based
bioprinting.
7–10In addition, the use of multi-head deposition
systems (MHDSs) allows the simultaneous or subsequentprinting of multiple materials. Besides, there are several
custom-made bioprinting systems developed with various
application-specific functions.
7–10In these methods, 3D con- †These authors contributed equally to this work.aBiomaterials Innovation Research Center, Division of Engineering in Medicine,
Department of Medicine, Brigham and Women ’s Hospital, Harvard Medical School,
Cambridge, MA 02139, USA
bHarvard-MIT Division of Health Sciences and Technology, Massachusetts Institute
of Technology, Cambridge, MA 02139, USA.
E-mail: mdokmeci@rics.bwh.harvard.edu
cDepartment of Biomedical Engineering, Faculty of Engineering and Natural Sciences,
Biruni University, Istanbul 34010, Turkey
dWyss Institute for Biologically Inspired Engineering, Harvard University, Boston,
MA 02115, USA
eDepartment of Radiology, David Ge ﬀen School of Medicine, University of California-
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
fCenter for Minimally Invasive Therapeutics (C-MIT), University of California-Los
Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
gDepartment of Bioindustrial Technologies, College of Animal Bioscience and
Technology, Konkuk University, Seoul 143-701, Republic of Korea
hCenter for Nanotechnology, King Abdulaziz University, Jeddah 21569, Saudi Arabia
iDepartment of Bioengineering, Department of Chemical and Biomolecular
Engineering, Henry Samueli School of Engineering and Applied Sciences, University
of California-Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
jCalifornia NanoSystems Institute (CNSI), University of California-Los Angeles,
Los Angeles, CA 90095, USA
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online
View Journalstructs are programmed in a computer-aided design/computer-
aided manufacturing (CAD/CAM) system. In all of these
diﬀerent bioprinting strategies, however, the bioinks are an
essential component, and are cross-linked or stabilized duringor immediately after the bioprinting to create the final shapes
of the intended tissue constructs. The selection of the bioink
depends on the specific application ( e.g., target tissue) and the
type of cells as well as the bioprinter to be used. While the
field has seen significant development in the bioprinting mod-
alities (reviewed elsewhere),
7–10their applications have been
limited by the lack of appropriate bioinks, which both need to
meet the requirements for bioprinting and to have the proper
bioactivity of the di ﬀerent cell types.
An ideal bioink should possess the desired physicochemical
properties, such as proper mechanical, rheological, chemical,
and biological characteristics.11These properties should lead
to: (i) the generation of tissue constructs with adequate
mechanical strength and robustness, while retaining the
tissue-matching mechanics, preferably in a tunable manner;(ii) adjustable gelation and stabilization to aid the bioprinting
of structures with high shape fidelity; (iii) biocompatibilityand, if necessary, biodegradability mimicking the natural
microenvironment of the tissues; (iv) suitability for chemical
modifications to meet tissue-specific needs; and (v) the poten-
tial for large-scale production with minimum batch-to-batchvariations.
12Since determining the optimal cell-laden bioink
formulation is the vital step toward successful bioprinting, to
date, various natural and synthetic biomaterials with specificfeatures have been utilized as bioinks.
13Moreover, standar-
dized bioink formulations are urgently needed that allow for
their use in di ﬀerent bioprinting applications.
The goal of this review is therefore to present an in-depth
overview of the state of the art in existing bioinks. The review
includes both natural and synthetic biomaterials used eitheralone or in combination, and in certain cases, multicellular
spheroids used as bioinks (Table 1). Those studies in which
biopolymers are printed without embedded cells and thosewhere the cells are seeded post-printing are excluded from the
review, and only bioinks that contain cells are discussed. We
first describe natural bioinks and then move on to syntheticbioinks and multicellular spheroids, followed by several com-
mercial bioinks, where the main advantages and drawbacks of
P. Selcan Gungor-OzkerimSelcan Gungor Ozkerim is a
bioengineer and holds an MSc inBiomedical Engineering. Her
PhD was based on designing
complex 3D tissue sca ﬀolds for
tissue engineering purposes. She
developed a novel multilayered
nanofibrous sca ﬀold system by
using various polymeric bioma-
terials in combination with con-
trolled release systems. Sheworked at Harvard –
Massachusetts Institute of
Technology (MIT) in the Health
Sciences & Technology (HST) division as a postdoctoral research
fellow and studied the 3D bioprinting of cell-laden tissue con-
structs. She generated viable and perfusable functional vascularconstructs that could be utilized for the vascularization of various
tissue sca ﬀolds.
Ilyas InciIlyas Inci received his Ph.D in
Bioengineering at HacettepeUniversity in Turkey. His Ph.D
study was on the e ﬀect of cryogel
scaﬀolds for calvarial defect
repair. After his Ph.D, he worked
as a post-doctoral research
fellow in Sabanci University inTurkey and then he attended
Harvard-Massachusetts Institute
of Technology (MIT), HealthSciences and Technology division
to do research on tissue engin-
eering as a post-doctoral
research fellow. His research interests mainly focus on using bio-
compatible sca ﬀolds to develop therapeutic methods in tissue
engineering and analyzing the e ﬀects of applied tissue engineering
methods on molecular signaling during tissue regeneration.
Fig. 1 Schematic representation of the main 3D bioprinting technologies. (a) Inkjet/droplet bioprinting. (b) Extrusion-based bioprinting. (c) Laser-
assisted bioprinting.3Reproduced with permission Copyright Nature Publishing Group, 2014.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineeach category are discussed. We subsequently provide a short
section to elaborate on some of the new bioink formulation
strategies that are not mentioned in the preceding sections.We finally conclude with future perspectives on the remaining
challenges associated with the current bioinks and the further
need for standardization.
2. Hydrogel-based bioinks
Hydrogels have numerous attractive features for use as tissuescaﬀolds. For example, they are biocompatible and typically
biodegradable, and a majority of them possess specific cell-
binding sites that are desirable for cell attachment, spreading,
growth, and di ﬀerentiation. In addition, some of these bio-
materials in their modified forms can be readily photocross-
linked.
14Hydrogel biomaterials, including alginate, gelatin,
collagen, fibrin/fibrinogen, gellan gum, hyaluronic acid (HA),agarose, chitosan, silk, decellularized extracellular matrix
(dECM), poly(ethylene glycol) (PEG), and Pluronic, and their
use as bioinks will be discussed in the following section.
2.1. Protein-based bioinks
Collagen is the main structural protein in the extracellular
matrix (ECM) of mammalian cells. Collagen thus possesses
tissue-matching physicochemical properties, together withsuperior in vitro /in vivo biocompatibility, and has been widely
used in biomedical applications.
15Koch et al. used collagen as
a bioink formulation with encapsulated keratinocytes andfibroblasts and bioprinted multilayer 3D skin tissue constructs
viaLaBP.
16They investigated the viability and morphological
functions of both cell types following bioprinting. Their find-ings demonstrated the presence of intercellular communi-cations between di ﬀerent cell types and suggested that the fab-
ricated skin grafts had tissue-specific functions, which are
promising for fabricating complex multicellular tissue con-structs. The same group further evaluated the in vivo appli-
cations of these constructs and demonstrated the formation of
3D skin-like tissue viaproliferation and proper di ﬀerentiation
of the cells.
17Another study also utilized a collagen bioink for
skin tissue engineering and created mature tissues with dis-
tinct cell layers.18Moon et al. developed a valve-based droplet
ejector system to bioprint smooth muscle cells (SMCs)-laden
collagen droplets, which formed line patterns with layer-by-
layer deposition and demonstrated uniform cell seeding withcontrolled resolution.
19In another study, the di ﬀerentiation
potential of bioprinted mesenchymal stem cells (MSCs) was
investigated.20Here, MSCs were encapsulated in collagen
alone or collagen –agarose blend bioink and were bioprinted
using an extrusion-based platform. The collagen-only matrix
supported the spreading of the cells following printing, in con-trast to the behavior of the cells in the hybrid matrix made
with agarose, which kept its structural integrity but did not
allow cell spreading. The results revealed that the anisotropicsoft collagen-rich matrices were better suited for osteogenesis,
whereas the isotropic sti ﬀagarose-rich matrices supported adi-
pogenesis of the bioprinted 3D constructs. Collagen may alsobe combined with alginate for use as a composite bioink. Also,
preosteoblasts and human adipose tissue-derived stem cells
(ASCs) were encapsulated in this bioink to bioprint 3D porouscellular blocks.
11Here, the cells were first cultured on a col-
lagen gel and then the cell-laden collagen gel was combined
with alginate. The results showed that the osteogenic potentialof the collagen-alginate bioink was higher than the one with
alginate alone. Moreover, hepatic lineage di ﬀerentiation of the
ASCs was also achieved in the bioprinted blocks, implying that
Yu Shrike ZhangYu Shrike Zhang received his Ph.
D. from Georgia Institute of
Technology in the WallaceH. Coulter Department of
Biomedical Engineering in 2013.
He is currently a Faculty andAssociate Bioengineer in the
Division of Engineering in
Medicine at the Brigham andWomen ’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School. Dr Zhang ’s
research is focused on innovatingmedical engineering technologies
to recreate functional biomimetic
tissues and tissue models, including biomaterials, bioprinting,organs-on-chips, medical devices, biomedical imaging, and biosen-
sing. He is actively collaborating with a multidisciplinary team
encompassing biomedical, mechanical, electrical, and computerengineers as well as biologists and clinicians to ultimately trans-
late these cutting-edge technologies into clinics.
Ali KhademhosseiniAli Khademhosseini is the Levi
Knight Professor of
Bioengineering, ChemicalEngineering and Radiology at
the University of California-Los
Angeles (UCLA). He is theFounding Director of the Center
for Minimally Invasive
Therapeutics (C-MIT) at UCLAand the Associate Director of
the California NanoSystems
Institute. Previously, he was aProfessor of Medicine at Harvard
Medical School. He is recognized
as a leader in combining micro- and nano-engineering approacheswith advanced biomaterials for regenerative medicine applications
and has authored ∼500 journal papers (H-index >98 & >35 000
citations). He is a fellow of AIMBE, BMES, RSC, FBSE, and AAAS.Read more at: http://www.tissueeng.net/.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinethis new bioink could be used in various tissue engineering
applications. Collagen is also widely used as a biopaper in bio-
printing applications. Biopaper is the substrate used in bio-printing and is the analog of the media used in standard print-
ing processes and it is commonly referred to the hydrogel
surface on which the cell-laden bioink or cell spheroids can bebioprinted.
21–23
Gelatin is produced by the denaturation of collagen.24It
can be derived from bones, tendons, or skins of animals via
acidic or basic hydrolysis. Its solution is thermosensitive and
can form a hydrogel at lower temperatures in a concentration-
dependent manner, and consequently it is one of the mostwidely used natural polymers for many biomedical appli-
cations. Some of the superior advantages of gelatin include
biocompatibility, biodegradability, low antigenicity, inclusionof intrinsic Arg-Gly-Asp (RGD) motifs, accessible active groups,
absence of harmful byproducts, ease of processing, and low
cost.
25–27All of these properties, and especially its cellular
aﬃnity, make it a versatile material for applications in tissue
engineering and bioprinting. For bioprinting applications,
gelatin with a wide range of concentrations has been used as abioink material and/or as a composite with other polymers. In
addition, its modified forms, which can be chemically cross-
linked, have also been adapted for bioprinting, such as gelatinmethacryloyl (GelMA).
28
Zhang et al. used gelatin –alginate composite bioinks to
encapsulate myoblasts and investigated the mechanical pro-perties of the bioprinted soft tissue constructs.
29By using a
dual-nozzle system, they bioprinted 3D filaments with
diﬀerent structural configurations, such as layers with specific
angles. The process consisted of a two-step cross-linking pro-
cedure; the physical cross-linking of gelatin at a low tempera-
ture during bioprinting and ionic cross-linking of the alginatewith Ca
2+ions following the bioprinting step. They observedthat the mechanical strength of the cell-laden constructs
decreased during the culture period but the low-porosity and
the angled geometry of the structures supported their mechan-ical durability. Although bioprinting at low temperatures
resulted in a drastic decrease in cell viability during the
first few days, cell proliferation increased over culture. Inanother study, a gelatin –alginate composite bioink was used
for bioprinting hard tissue constructs.
30The authors reported
that human osteosarcoma cells remained in a non-proliferat-ing state within this composite bioink matrix, so they pro-
posed filling the construct with an agarose overlay following
bioprinting. Moreover, they added [polyphosphate (polyp).Ca
2+-complex] into the overlay for better mineral deposition.
This combined system significantly improved both the cellular
proliferation and mechanical properties of the cell-laden con-structs, indicating that this system could be extended for other
tissue engineering applications by adapting it for specific
tissue needs. Another study utilized gelatin –alginate hydrogels
for bioprinting cell-laden aortic valve conduits designed from
micro-computed tomography images.
31They simultaneously
bioprinted encapsulated SMCs in the valve root part and valveleaflet interstitial cells in the leaflet part of the constructs in
line with their anatomical regions by using an extrusion-based
bioprinter. The bioprinted constructs were close to clinicaldimensions and were cross-linked in a CaCl
2solution post-
printing. It was noted that the optimal ratio of the gelatin and
alginate combination in the blend was crucial for the printingquality for enabling proper cell growth, spreading, and pheno-
typic maturation. Using the same bioprinting system, Wüst
et al. fabricated 3D tubular constructs using a composite
hydrogel with tunable properties.
32Additionally, they used
syringe tip heaters to control the temperature of the bioink,
which prevented clogging and hence improved the bioprintingprocess. They supplemented the gelatin/alginate bioink with
hydroxyapatite (HAp), which is an osteoinductive agent with
numerous applications in bone tissue engineering.
Due to its thermoresponsive property, gelatin can be tuned
and physically cross-linked during bioprinting by thermal gela-
tion, which helps to maintain the shapes of the bioprintedstructures. However, temperature-induced gelation is typically
slow and unstable. To address this problem, gelatin has been
further modified with photopolymerizable methacryloylgroups, enabling covalent cross-linking by UV light under mild
conditions following the bioprinting process.
33–37This function-
alized form of gelatin, namely GelMA, is a promising bioinkmaterial because its cross-linking density can be easily con-
trolled during methacryloyl group activation or during photo-
polymerization, which determines the physicochemical pro-perties of the final construct. In bioprinting, since preservation
of the integrity and mechanical strength of the bioprinted
constructs are two of the most important criteria, GelMA isa suitable material for meeting these requirements. Our
group reported a strategy for bioprinting cell-laden GelMA
bioinks by using an extrusion-based bioprinter.
38Various
GelMA and cell concentrations and di ﬀerent UV exposure
times were explored to evaluate the printability of cell-laden
Mehmet Remzi DokmeciMehmet Remzi Dokmeci is an
Associate Adjunct Professor ofRadiology at the University of
California-Los Angeles (UCLA).
Previously, he was an Instructorof Medicine at Brigham and
Women ’s Hospital, Harvard
Medical School. He has alsoworked at Corning-Intellisense, a
MEMS foundry and was a faculty
member in the Department ofElectrical and Computer
Engineering at Northeastern
University. Dr Dokmeci has long
standing expertise in micro- and nanoscale sensors and devices
and related applications to biomedical devices, organs on a chip,
regenerative medicine and implantable biosensors. He has writtenover 116 journal articles, 110 conference publications, 4 book
chapters, and has 4 patents.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineTable 1 Summary of various bioinks used to date
Natural biomaterial-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting method Cell typeTarget
tissue Cellular response Ref.
Alginate Extrusion-based
printingCartilage progenitor cells (CPCs) Vascular 89% cell viability, after 12 h to 72 h
incubation59
Extrusion-based
printingCPCs Vascular 95% cell viability, up to day 7; better
diﬀerentiation60
Extrusion-based
printingHuman umbilical vein SMCs Vascular High proliferation up to day 7; ECM
formation54
Extrusion-based
printingL929 mouse fibroblasts Vascular >90% cell viability in day 1, >70% cell
viability up to day 761
Laser-assisted cell
printingNIH-3T3 fibroblasts Cell viability after 24 h decreased with
increased gelation, alginate, Ca2+or
laser exposure62
Laser-assisted cell
printingRabbit carcinoma cell line B16 and
human umbilical vein endothelial
cells (HUVECs) cell line Eahy926High cell density and cell level
organization63
Laser-assisted cell
printingHuman breast cancer cells 85% or higher cell viability up to day 5 64
Extrusion-based
printingNIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts Microscopic evaluation: similar viability
between day 1 and day 765
Extrusion-based
printingASCs >90% cell viability on day 9 66
MHDS Rat heart endothelial cells Around 80% cell viability up to day 21 9
MHDS Rat adrenal medulla endothelial
cellsIncreased printing pressure decreased
cell viability at around 40%67
MHDS Liver cells, human hepatic
carcinoma cells cell line HepG2Liver Enhanced metabolic drug conversion 68
Inkjet bioprinting NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts Vascular >80% cell viability in 72 h 71
Inkjet bioprinting NIH-3T3 mouse fibroblasts Increasing cell concentration increased
droplet breakup time72
Extrusion-based
printingHuman ASCs (hASCs) Proliferation, spreading and structure
integrity up to 8 days of incubation55
Gelatin Cell assembler C2C12 mouse myoblasts 55% cell viability 2 h after printing and
increased up to day 429
Rapid prototyping
with 3D BioplotterHuman osteogenic sarcoma cells
SaOS-2Non-proliferating state; addition of
[polyp.Ca2+complex] and agarose
improved proliferation30
Extrusion-based
printingAortic root sinus SMCs and aortic
valve leaflet interstitial cellsAortic valve >80% cell viability on day 7; good
spreading and phenotype retention31
Extrusion-based
printingHepG2 and NIH-3T3 cells Vascular >80% cell viability up to day 8 after
printing38
MHDS HUVECs and human neonatal
dermal fibroblastsVascular Around 70% cell viability on day 0;
>80% cell viability on day 7 after
printing39
Extrusion-based
printingMSCs Cartilage Cell viability of all the bioinks (agarose,
alginate, GelMA and BioINK) werearound 80%42
Extrusion-based
printingACPCs, MSCs, chondrocytes Cartilage Cell viabilities were around 75% and
90% at days 1 and 14 after bioprinting,respectively43
Collagen Laser-assisted
bioprintingNIH-3T3 fibroblasts and human
keratinocyte cell line (HaCaT)Skin Intercellular interactions between
diﬀerent cell types; viability up to 10
days16
Laser-assisted
bioprintingNIH-3T3 fibroblasts and HaCaT Skin Proliferation and di ﬀerentiation profiles
were similar to native tissue17
Robotic dispensing Fibroblasts (HFF-1) and HaCaT Skin Matured distinct multiple cell layers on
day 14; >80% cell viability up to day 718
Droplet ejector
printingBladder SMCs >90% cell viability following printing;
proliferation up to 14 days; successful
cell patterning19
Custom-made drop-
on-demandbioprintingMSCs Bone >95% cell viability on day 21; osteogenic
diﬀerentiation20
Extrusion-based
printinghASCs and preosteoblasts (MC3T3-
E1)Bone and
liver>85% cell viability on day 1,
proliferation up to day 7; higherosteogenic activity and hepatogenicdiﬀerentiation11Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineTable 1 (Contd.)
Natural biomaterial-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting method Cell typeTarget
tissue Cellular response Ref.
Fibrinogen/
fibrinCustom-made inkjet
bioprinterNot specified Good expansion and proliferation up to
day 746
Inkjet printing Rabbit articular chondrocytes Cartilage >80% cell viability up to day 7; tissue-
specific ECM formation47
Laser-assisted
bioprintingASCs and endothelial colony-forming
cellsVascular Interaction between di ﬀerent cells in
diﬀerent layers48
Gellan gum Extrusion-based
printingMC3T3 Addition of gellan gum did not a ﬀect
cell viability77
Extrusion-based
printingEquine chondrocytes and MSCs 75 –86% viability after 1 –3 days post
printing80
Extrusion-based
printingRat bone marrow MSCs Bone/
cartilageMicrocarriers supported cell viability,
spread and osteogenic di ﬀerentiation81
Extrusion-based,
hand-heldbioprintingPrimary neural cells Brain >70% viability up to day 5; RGD
improved cell growth and networkformation79
Silk Robotic dispensing BALB/3T3 mouse fibroblasts Average viability of 71% after 48 h of
incubation51
MHDS Human nasal inferior turbinate-
derived MSCsHydrogel cross-linking with mushroom
tyrosinase supported chondrogenic and
adipogenic di ﬀerentiation, cross-linking
with sonication supported osteogenicdiﬀerentiation52
Hyaluronic acid Extrusion-based
printingChondrocyte, osteoblast Osteo-
chondralOsteoblasts encapsulated in collagen-
1 hydrogel showed higher amount of
osteogenic marker than osteoblastswithin HA; chondrocytes cultured onHA hydrogels showed higher expression
of chondrogenic marker than
chondrocytes cultured on collagen-185
Commercial multi-
material bioprinterHuman aortic valvular interstitial
cellsHeart valve Cell viability was >90% for the
encapsulated cells41
Dual syringe
deposition toolHepG2, human intestinal epithelial
cells (Int-407), NIH-3T3 fibroblastsCells attached only to the parts of
hydrogels containing a blend of GeMAand HAMA and they did not attach toonly HAMA parts40
Extrusion-based
printingHepG2, Int-407, NIH-3T3 fibroblasts Cell viability was more than 95% at day
3 and at day 786
Pneumatic
dispensingChondrocytes Cartilage After 3 days, cell viability of
chondrocytes seeded on printed GelMA
and on GelMA-HA sca ﬀolds were
around 73% and 82% respectively27
Bioprinter with a
temperature control
unit and a UV light
sourceBovine chondrocytes Embedding the cells in the bioink
caused cell death and after removal of
HA-pNIPAAM, there was a high cell
viability due to the improved di ﬀusion87
Dextran Pneumatic
dispensingEquine chondrocytes HA-dexHEMA preparations showed
appropriate viscoelastic and
pseudoplastic behaviors89
Agarose Droplet generation by
nitrogen pressureand valve openingRat bladder SMCs Cell viabilities were approximately 95% 19
Extrusion-based
bioprintingSaOS2 Application of poly-P.Ca2+increased cell
proliferation30
Extrusion-based
bioprintingHuman MG-63 osteosarcoma cells,
mouse fibroblastsCell viabilities on day 1, at 4 days and at
7 days after fabrication were 96%, 99%
and 97% respectively91
Bioprinting with a
valve ejectorNIH-3T3 murine fibroblasts Cells stayed alive for 2 weeks in the
scaﬀolds93
Extrusion-based
bioprinting with a
high-density fluidHuman MSCs (hMSCs), MG-63
osteosarcoma cellsCells were viable 24 h after bioprinting
and after 21 days in culture92
Agarose/
chitosanExtrusion-based
bioprintinghMSCs Cell viabilities ≥95%; on day 21; in
collagen matrix, cells di ﬀerentiate into
osteogenic tissue and in agarose matrix,
they di ﬀerentiate into adipogenic tissue20Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineTable 1 (Contd.)
Natural biomaterial-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting method Cell typeTarget
tissue Cellular response Ref.
Hydroxy-apatite Inkjet bioprinting hMSCs Bone In HAp used group, expression of
collagen and ALP were the highest111
Pneumatic
dispensingGoat multipotent stromal cells Bone In the fast release group, osteocalcin
expression was lower than the slow
release group; results revealed that therelease speed did not change bonevolume significantly104
3D bioprinting with a
heatable nozzlehMSCs Bone Cell viability was 85% after 3 days of in
vitro culture32
Laser-assisted
bioprintingHuman osteoprogenitor cells Bone Cell viability and proliferation did not
change up to 15 days141
Laser-assisted
bioprintingHuman endothelial cells EA.hy926 Droplets were obtained with 70 μmi n
diameter with five to seven living cellsper droplet142
De-cellularized
matrix based
bioinksBioprinting with
plunger-based
dispensing systemhASCs, human inferior turbinate
tissue-derived MSCs, L6 rat
myoblastsAdipose/
heart/
cartilageHigh cell survival, cell-line-specific gene
expression and specific ECM formation
in printed tissue constructs99
Dispensing system
based bioprintingASCs Adipose After decellularization, remaining DNA
content was 3%100
Extrusion-based
bioprintingPrimary human hepatocytes, primary
human stellate cells, primary humanKupﬀer cellsLiver Printed tissue construct was functional
as seen from production of detectablelevels of albumin and urea101
Growth factor
based bioinksInkjet bioprinting C2C12 Cells on the printed BMP-2 samples
showed a significant increase in ALP
expression; on the control and printedFGF-2 samples no noticeable ALPexpression was observed146
Inkjet bioprinting C2C12 Histological analysis showed human
acellular dermis alone did not result inbone formation; bone formation wasobserved on the BMP-2-printed
construct parts121
Matrigel Pneumatic
dispensing systemEndothelial progenitor cells Vascular Alginate improved printing; degradation
was increased and formation of vessel-like structures were decreased106
Extrusion-based
printingHepG2, human mammary epithelial
of the cell line (M10)Liver Cells were viable 48 h after printing 103
Laser-assisted
bioprintingRabbit carcinoma cell line (B16),
HUVECsCells were viable 24 h after printing 63
Pneumatic
dispensingGoat multipotent stromal cells Bone In the fast release group osteocalcin
expression was lower than the slowrelease group; micro-CT results revealedthat release speed did not change bone
volume significantly104
Inkjet bioprinting Human alveolar epithelial type II cell
line A549, hybrid human cell lineEA.hy926Lung Cell viability >95% for epithelial cells
and co-cultures; ≥86% for endothelial
cells105
Extrusion-based
printingHuman MSCs, human H1 embryonic
stem cells, Caco2 cells, HUVECs,human adult dermal fibroblasts,human adult keratinocytesGastro-
intestinal/skinSubcutaneous implantation of
hydrogels revealed very low immuneresponse without capsule formation for2 months12
Synthetic-biomaterials-based bioinks
BiomaterialBioprinting
method Cell type Target tissue Cellular response Ref.
PCL Extrusion-based
printingChondrocyte, osteoblast Osteo-
chondral
tissueOsteoblasts in collagen-1 hydrogel showed higher amount
of osteogenic marker than osteoblasts in HA; chondrocytes
in HA hydrogels showed higher expressions ofchondrogenic markers than chondrocytes cultured incollagen-185
Inkjet
bioprintingRabbit chondrocytes Cartilage Cell viability was 80% one week after printing; after 8
weeks, large amount of cartilage ECM formation onprinted constructs47
MHDS Human nasal septal
chondrocytesCartilage 3D printed sca ﬀolds were implanted subcutaneously; led
to increased cartilage tissue and type-II collagen formation69Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineTable 1 (Contd.)
Synthetic-biomaterials-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting
methodCell type Target tissue Cellular response Ref.
Pneumatic
dispenserHuman chondrocyte
cells (C20A4)Viability of cells on day 1 and day 3 after printing were
approximately 90% and 70%70
PEG Extrusion-based
printingHUVECs hMSCs seeded on HUVECs laden printed construct and
they spread into empty spaces of that construct at day 449
Extrusion-based
printingNIH-3T3 fibroblasts,
HepG2 C3A and Int 407Vascular High cell viability up to 4 weeks 110
Inkjet printing-
modifiedBone marrow derived
hMSCs (hBMSCs)Bone >85% cell viability up to 3 weeks; increased osteogenic
marker formation111
Extrusion-based
printinghBMSCs >75% cell viability up to day 7 after printing 112
Extrusion-based
printingMSCs Susceptibility of outer cells of the needle edge was higher
when shear level was higher than 1639 s−1in poloxamer, a
commercially available cream, alginate-based and algi-nate –gelatin composite bioinks114
Extrusion-based
printingNIH-3T3 fibroblasts More than 50% cells were damaged on the edges of
printed GelMA and PEGDA droplets after UV exposure for
5 minutes, however less than 20% cells were damaged onthe edges of RAPID bioink after 5 minutes exposure inCaCl
2solution116
Pluronic Extrusion-based
printingPrimary culture bovine
chondrocytesCell viability: 62% for pure, 86% for modified Pluronic on
day 14117
HAMA-
pHPMA-lac/
PEGExtrusion-based Primary culture equine
chondrocytesCartilage Medium level HAMA concentrations (0.25% –0.5%)
promoted cartilage-like matrix production compared to
HAMA-free hydrogels; higher (1%) concentrations led to
undesirable fibrocartilage formation118
PG-HA Extrusion-based Human and equine
MSCsArticular
cartilagePG-HA bioink showed higher improvement on the cell
viability and di ﬀerentiation with respect to PG-only bioink119
PVP Inkjet
bioprintingNeonatal human
foreskin fibroblasts(HFF-1)PVP improved the survival and homogenous dispersion of
the printed cells120
Cell aggregate/pellet-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting method Cell typeTarget
tissue Cellular response Ref.
Cell aggregate/
pellet-based
bioinksExtrusion-based
printingCHO Cellular droplets and sheets were fused after
printing22
Manual printing CHO Minimum number of cells died at the end of
each fusion of aggregates21
Extrusion-based
printingChicken cardiomyocytes CHO,
human vascular endothelial cellsCardiac
tissueSynchronous beating was observed after 90 h
of bioprinting127
Inkjet bioprinting CHO No significant di ﬀerence was found in cell
viability between printed and unprinted cells;cell viability of printed cells was 89%23
Inkjet bioprinting D1 murine MSCs, murine
mammary cancer cell line (4T07)Addition of EDTA did not cause significant cell
deaths129
Extrusion-based
printingMSCs, Schwann cells Nerve Extensive axonal re-growth in both the
proximal and distal ends of the printed nerve
conduits130
Extrusion-based
printingMouse embryonic fibroblast cells Aorta No activation of caspase-3 was observed in
continuously printed ring cells based bioink123
Inkjet bioprinting Human alveolar epithelial type II
cell line A549, hybrid human cell
line EA.hy926Lung Cell viability was ≥95% for epithelial cells and
co-cultures and ≥86% for endothelial cells105
Robotic dispensing Fibroblasts, keratinocytes Skin Viability for both cell types was ≥95%;
uniform distributions of fibroblasts in the
dermal layer and uniform distributions of
keratinocytes in the epidermal layer wereobserved18
3D bioprinting with
valve-based setup
Human embryonic stem cells,human embryonic kidney cells
(HEK293)Cell viability was more than 95% after 24 h
following the printing and more than 89%
after 72 h131Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineTable 1 (Contd.)
Cell aggregate/pellet-based bioinks
Biomaterial Bioprinting method Cell type Target
tissueCellular response Ref.
Dispensing
hanging-dropsbased printingAdult murine cardiac valve
interstitial cells, mouse BMSCs,mouse dermal fibroblastsCell aggregates treated with growth factors
have higher fusion capacity than theaggregates without growth factor treatment132
Extrusion-based
printingCHO, human umbilical vein
smooth muscle cells, humanskin fibroblastsApoptosis was shown with caspase-3 staining
of few cells in the printed vascular wall133
Custom-made
bioprinter with four
cartridgesD1 murine MSCs, 4T07 Cells showed higher cell attachment and
fidelity of shape of the bioprinted constructs
on printing patterns which had units of thesmaller areas on collagen covered-coverslipsfor each cell type134
Commercial bioinks
BiomaterialBioprinting
method Cell typeTarget
tissue Cellular response Ref.
Derma-
matrixInkjet
bioprintingC2C12 myogenic precursor cells Histological analysis showed human acellular
dermis alone did not result in bone formation and
bone formation was limited to the BMP-2-printedhalf of the constructs121
Novogel Extrusion-
based printingAortic SMCs, human aortic endothelial
cells, human dermal fibroblasts, CHO,
Schwann cellsAfter printing, NovoGel was removed and histology
results showed vascular structures with cells and
cell-produced ECM at 14 days122
Extrusion-
based printingHepG2, NIH-3T3 fibroblasts Cell viability was more than 80% after printing for
8d a y s38
Extrusion-
based printingMouse embryonic fibroblast cells Aorta No activation of caspase-3 in continuously printed
bioink ring cells123
Composite bioinks/bioinks with bioactive molecules
BiomaterialBioprinting
method Cell type Target tissue Cellular response Ref.
AuNPs Extrusion-based
printingNIH-3T3 cells Vascular Cells proliferated and secreted ECM up to 4 weeks 86
AgNPs Extrusion-based
printingChondrocytes Cyborg
organs/
cartilage>90% cell viability; high ECM formation up to week 10,
cells were alive and metabolically active135
Magnetic iron
oxide particlesHybrid nano-
printing systemPorcine aortic
endothelial cellsVascular Cell viability decreased with nanoparticles and printing
pressure, but did not depend on nozzle diameter78
Blood plasma Laser-assisted
bioprintinghASCs Adipose Di ﬀerentiation into adipogenic lineage over 21 days;
same amount of proliferation between printed andnon-printed samples148
Cryo bioink Extrusion-based
printingRed blood cells Cellular morphology and functionality of the printed
patterns were maintained successfully during and after
vitrification149
Ultrashort
peptidesSequential
depositionhMSCs Vascular/skin Cell elongation was observed in less than a week; good
in vivo
biocompatibility and stability12
Genetically
engineeredphageExtrusion-based
printingMC3T3-E1 Bone Higher levels of cell viability, proliferation and
diﬀerentiation with engineered phages13
Conductive
bioinkExtrusion-based
printingCardiomyocytes and
cardiac fibroblastsCardiac
tissueHigh level expression of cardiomyocyte markers, cell
viability 90% and no cytotoxicity of carbon nanotubes
on cells during electrical conductivity137Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article OnlineGelMA constructs. Using a 10% GelMA concentration, good
results were obtained with a cell density of 1.5 × 106cells per
mL; however, no significant di ﬀerences were observed while
the UV exposure times were varied from 15 to 60 s UV. Following
the characterization, we were able to print various designs of
GelMA constructs with good cell viability, proliferation, andspreading. We also demonstrated the bioprinting of 3D GelMA
constructs embedded with sacrificial agarose microchannel
networks. After removing these sacrificial layers, the perfusionof the constructs with the media was demonstrated, leading
to improved mass transport, cellular viability, and the di ﬀer-
entiation of osteogenic cells in the GelMA matrix.
38This
method may be beneficial for the vascularization of thick 3D
engineered constructs. Kolesky et al. recently reported an
alternative method by co-printing multiple cell types, ECM-likestructures, and embedded vascular structures by a MHDS,
where the main bioink matrix was GelMA.
39To create the vas-
cular network, Pluronic F127 was used as the sacrificial ink,which was then removed after the printing process by liquefy-
ing it at a lower temperature (Fig. 2). A MHDS system reduced
the printing time needed to create a complex tissue constructand the proposed method had higher survival rates for the
multiple cell types encapsulated in GelMA. Other groups have
blended GelMA with HA and used this mixture as a hybridbioink.
27,40,41In addition to its advantageous properties for
creating bone and cartilage tissues, HA can be used to improve
the viscosity of GelMA prepolymer solutions. Since themechanical properties are critical in bioprinting processes,
HA can be added to GelMA solutions to create more robust
structures, which will be discussed in more detail in the HAsection. Both collagen and gelatin are amenable for bioprint-
ing applications; however, to generate tissues with intended
mechanical and biochemical properties further characteriz-ation is required. As mentioned, the parameter space for print-ability, cell density, related changes in viscosity, cell viability,
etc. are quite large and the printing protocols require further
experiments and modeling e ﬀorts prior to generating tissues
with reproducible properties. In case these materials do not
possess the proper properties, they will be combined with
other materials to create suitable formulations.
During the preparation of bioinks, the relevance of the hydro-
gels ’bioactivity and the related cellular response is an impor-
tant factor. Daly et al. used agarose, alginate, GelMA, and
BioINK (methacrylated PEG-based hydrogel) as bioinks for car-
tilage tissue engineering to analyze the e ﬀect of several
bioinks on a single cell type.
42Each hydrogel was blended
with MSCs before bioprinting. In addition, polycaprolactone
(PCL) microfibers were used to improve the mechanical pro-
perties of bioinks during the bioprinting process. In thisstudy, an extrusion-based bioprinting system (3D Bioplotter)
was used. It was shown that the alginate and agarose hydrogels
supported the formation of hyaline-like cartilage more thanthe other hydrogels with evidence of higher tissue staining for
type II collagen. On the other hand, GelMA and BioINK sup-
ported the formation of fibrocartilage-like tissue more thanthe other groups as proven by the observation of higher
amounts of both type I and type II collagen in tissues.
Mechanical studies demonstrated that the inclusion of PCLmicrofibers into bioinks increased the elastic moduli of algi-
nate and GelMA bioinks 544-fold and 45-fold, respectively, and
these values were within the range of articular cartilage. Cellviability studies showed that all the bioinks had high levels of
MSC viability after bioprinting ( ∼80%). In another study,
GelMA hydrogels containing di ﬀerent cell types were bio-
printed and the responses of these cells to a single bioink was
investigated.
43Articular cartilage-resident chondroprogenitor
cells (ACPCs)-, MSCs-, and chondrocytes-laden GelMA-basedhydrogels were used as bioinks for bioprinting. An extrusion-
Fig. 2 Schematic diagrams of thermoresponsive gelation and the corresponding shear elastic ( G’) and loss moduli ( G’’) measured as a function of
temperature for: (a) pure GelMA, and (b) ﬁbroblast-laden GelMA bioinks.39Reprinted with permission Copyright John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2014.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinebased bioprinter with BioCAD software was used. The results
showed that the ACPCs had better behavior than the chondro-
cytes regarding the production of neo-cartilage. In addition,unlike MSCs, ACPCs demonstrated the lowest gene expression
of hypertrophy marker collagen type X and the highest
expression of PRG4, which encodes an important protein(lubricin) in joint lubrication. ACPC- and MSC-laden bioinks
were combined in a multi-compartment structure to prepare
a bioprinted model of articular cartilage, which showedapparent deep and superficial zones with distinct ECM
compositions. Furthermore, it was shown that di ﬀerent cell
types demonstrated di ﬀerent cell responses to the same
bioink.
Fibrinogen is a large, fibrous, and soluble glycoprotein that
is involved in blood clot formation, where it is converted intoan insoluble fibrin molecule by thrombin in the presence of
Ca
2+viaintermolecular interactions.44,45In tissue engineering,
fibrinogen and fibrin are mainly used to fabricate functionaltissue constructs for the replacement of damaged tissues due
to their beneficial roles in wound healing. They are biocompa-
tible, biodegradable, and non-immunogenic, and induce cellattachment, proliferation, and ECM formation.
44,45
Nakamura et al. created bioinks using fibrin and alginate
and used them to bioprint structures using a custom-madeinkjet bioprinter.
46In this bioink formulation, fibrin had a
better cellular response, while alginate was a better material to
use to enable seamless bioprinting. Other composite bioinkforms are also available, such as fibrin-collagen, which was
combined with inkjet printing and electrospinning to improve
the mechanical properties of the final construct for cartilagetissue engineering.
47The constructs were fabricated in three
steps: first, PCL was electrospun as a substrate, then chondro-
cytes were encapsulated in fibrin/collagen and bioprinted ontop of the PCL layer, and finally another PCL layer was de-
posited using electrospinning. They found that this hybrid
system improved the mechanical properties of the constructand did not a ﬀect the cell survival rates. This new system may
be utilized for the formation of complex tissues. Gruene et al.
used fibrinogen as a bioink by mixing it with HA and used theLaBP method for the 3D assembly of multicellular arrays.
48
ASCs or endothelial colony-forming cells (ECFCs) were encap-sulated in a fibrinogen –HA mixture and then individual cell
types were separately bioprinted in a layer-by-layer fashion.
The bioprinting surface was covered with fibrin as a biopaper
and thrombin was sprayed on it to enable gelation and fixationof the bioprinted HA/fibrinogen droplets. They demonstrated
the formation of a vascular-like network, which indicated
the presence of interactions between the printed ASCs andECFCs from di ﬀerent layers. Alternatively, Rutz et al. blended
fibrinogen with PEG or a PEG –gelatin mixture.
49They found
that the incorporation of fibrinogen significantly increased thedegradation time and improved the robustness of the con-
structs after cross-linking with thrombin/Ca
2+solution follow-
ing the bioprinting. Fibrinogen was also used as a biopaperfor printing cell spheroids to fabricate microvasculature
networks.
45Silk is a natural polymer that has been used for centuries as
a suture material in medical applications. It has numerous
attractive properties as a biomaterial since it is highly elasticand has a slow degradation rate that is needed for providing
suﬃcient support for the cells until the new tissue is regener-
ated. In addition, it has a low immunogenicity and is biocom-patible, hence it is also suitable for clinical applications.
50Due
to these attractive properties, silk has long been utilized as a
scaﬀolding material for both soft and hard tissue engineering
applications. Recently, it has also been adapted for bioprinting
applications. Schacht et al. investigated the use of recombinant
spider silk to create hydrogels.51In this study, mouse fibro-
blasts were either cultured on bioprinted spider silk-based
hydrogels or were encapsulated inside the bioink material. It
was found that the viability of the encapsulated cells and thebioprinted cells were lower than the cells simply seeded
without using a bioprinter. Alternatively, a bioink was pre-
pared by including human nasal inferior turbinate-derivedmesenchymal progenitor cells into a mixture of gelatin and
silk fibroin (Fig. 3).
52It was found that the prepared hydrogels,
which were enzymatically cross-linked using a mushroom tyro-sinase-supported chondrogenic and adipogenic di ﬀeren-
tiations. In contrast, the hydrogels cross-linked using soni-
cation supported osteogenic di ﬀerentiation. The variations in
cellular response were due to the use of di ﬀerent cross-linking
methods during bioprinting. The enzyme mushroom tyro-
sinase oxidized the tyrosine residues of gelatin/silk into reac-tive elements that could react with each other or available
amines, while sonication changed the hydrophobicity and
increased the silk fibroin self-assembly to enable physicalcross-linking.
2.2. Polysaccharides
Alginate, also known as alginic acid, is a natural anionic poly-
saccharide refined from brown seaweed and is similar to the
glycosaminoglycans found in the native ECM of the humanbody. It has been commonly used in biomedicine due to its
biocompatibility, low cytotoxicity, mild gelation process, and
low cost.
53,54In particular, it has been widely used as a bioink
because of its fast gelation property under physiological con-
ditions without forming harmful byproducts.55,56The gelation
of alginate can be easily induced in the presence of divalentcations such as Ca
2+and Ba2+by forming bridges between
polymer chains, enabling physical cross-linking and solidifica-
tion.57,58The removal of the ionically cross-linked alginate gels
from a construct can occur viadissolution by release of the
divalent ions cross-linking the hydrogel by exchange reactions
with monovalent cations present in the surroundingmedium.
53
Since fast gelation leads to good printability, most of the
current bioprinting methods have utilized alginate or modifiedalginate alone, or alginate blended with other biomaterials as
bioinks. For example, Yu et al. developed a method to bioprint
vascular-like channels by encapsulating cartilage progenitorcells in alginate and obtained cell-laden hollow tubular con-
structs with good mechanical and biological properties.
59TheyBiomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinedesigned a coaxial nozzle system, whereby an alginate solution
was extruded through the sheath and a CaCl 2solution was
delivered in the core forming a tubular structure. This system
combined a single-nozzle bioprinter and a motion unit toenable extrusion-based bioprinting. It was noted that increas-
ing the alginate concentration from 2% to 6% (w/v) signifi-
cantly reduced the cell viability due to the increase in shearstress during extrusion resulting from the increased viscosity.
The same group further investigated the parameters that
aﬀected the diameter of the bioprinted filaments and the
gene expression profiles of the encapsulated cells using the
same printing procedure.
60Higher cell-specific gene
expressions were observed, thus confirming the functionalityand higher di ﬀerentiation ability of the cells within the
bioprinted perfusable alginate tubes compared to monolayer
cultured cells. Recently, they also encapsulated humanumbilical vein SMCs in alginate and, while using the same
printing method, they investigated the dehydration, swelling,
and degradation characteristics of the constructs in additionto ECM deposition of cells.
54In general, higher alginate con-
centrations were found to result in a lower cell viability, degra-
dation rate, porosity, and permeability, with 4% (w/v) alginatesuggested as the optimum concentration for the bioprinting
process, where ECM formation was observed on both surfaces
of the bioprinted tubes. Similarly, Gao et al. used the same
coaxial system for bioprinting an alginate bioink to fabricate
hollow tubes.
61They gradually immersed the stage into a
CaCl 2solution to further cross-link the construct, a promising
process with applications for achieving large-scale tissue bio-
printing (Fig. 4).Alginate was also widely used as a bioink in the LaBP
method, which is a promising technique for scaled-up bio-
printing with cellular resolution. In a typical process, a quartz
disk with a thin layer of cell-alginate coating is used. A laser isfocused on top of the quartz disk featuring an optically absorb-
ing layer, which generates local heating and creates a vapor
bubble in the underlying cell-alginate coating. The bubblethen expands and forces the formation of a droplet, which is
ejected into a CaCl
2bath (Fig. 5).62In LaBP, the gelation para-
meters and the concentration of alginate a ﬀect the cellular
viability. It was found that 2 min gelation led to higher cell via-
bility than 10 min gelation, which implied that a thin bioink
membrane was needed, whereas a thicker one could, on thecontrary, block the transport of oxygen and nutrients.
62In a
subsequent study, they further tested di ﬀerent alginate con-
centrations from 1 –3% (w/v), and found that higher alginate
concentrations resulted in lower viability, due to transport
limitations. Another group using a similar LaBP method
studied the e ﬀect of the viscosity of the bioinks using di ﬀerent
laser printing parameters.63By using higher alginate concen-
trations with higher viscosities, they were able to obtain dro-
plets with smaller diameters that enabled them to increase theresolution of the printed structures. Therefore, there seems to
be a balance in cell viability and resolution, thus necessitating
precise tuning of the alginate concentration as a bioink tomeet the needs of di ﬀerent applications. Increasing the con-
centration of encapsulated cells further increased the viscosity
and allowed them to bioprint constructs with higher cell den-sities de novo . LaBP was also used for developing a single-step
fabrication of cell-encapsulated alginate microbeads with
Fig. 3 The process of 3D-bioprinting of cell-encapsulated constructs by using silk-gelatin as a bioink.52Reprinted with permission Copyright
Elsevier, 2014.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineprecise pattern definition and delivery.64The laser was pro-
grammed to provide a single pulse to deposit each corres-ponding target spot and to eject a mixture of cancer cells and
alginate onto a gelatin-CaCl
2-coated substrate, where the bio-
printed droplets were cross-linked with CaCl 2in situ to form
microbeads. A higher cell viability and a better resolution were
achieved with this system. Similarly, Gasperini et al. bioprinted
cell-containing alginate beads onto the same gelatin-CaCl 2
coating by using an electrohydrodynamic deposition process.65
In this approach, the tip of the bioprinter nozzle was con-nected to an electrical pulse generator with high voltage,which was used to overcome the problems associated with
surface tension occurring at the tip of the liquid dispenser.The technique was compatible with the fabrication of 3D
tissue constructs viathe deposition of single dots or continu-
ous lines and enabled precise positioning with high cell viabi-lity. In another study, Williams et al. utilized alginate for bio-
printing spheroids fabricated from ASCs by using a droplet-
based bioprinting method.
66The main component of their
bioprinting system was a pen-like device, which was precisely
controlled and the liquid delivery unit enabled them to create
spheroids reproducibly with minimal variations in size. Theyfound that the encapsulated cells were uniformly dispersed in
the alginate construct and maintained good cell viability. This
system provided a platform that allowed control over the quan-tity of cells in each spheroid, which is an important feature for
controlled cell delivery in regenerative medicine.
Khalil et al. encapsulated endothelial cells inside alginate
and characterized the porous cell-laden alginate constructs
created after a direct cell writing process by using an inkjet-
based method and MHDS.
9They obtained high cell viability
after bioprinting and found that 1.5% (w/v) alginate and 0.5%
(w/v) CaCl 2were the optimum concentrations in their process.
They reported a 1/3 decrease in the mechanical strength of theconstructs by the end of 3 weeks. The same group also investi-
gated the relationship between the shear stress that the cells
experience during dispensing and cellular viability.
67They
encapsulated endothelial cells inside the bioink and found
that the survival rates of the cells decreased by around 40%
when the bioprinting pressure was increased from 5 psi to40 psi. Furthermore, bioprinting processes utilizing a nozzle
with a smaller-diameter were also found to decrease the viabi-
lity of cells, but with a less pronounced e ﬀect. Using the same
method, Chang et al. utilized alginate as a bioink and engin-
eered a microchip model for the drug metabolism studies of
Fig. 4 Bioprinting process of a 3D structure with built-in microchannels by using an alginate bioink. Physical cross-linking process was utilized via
calcium ions.61Reprinted with permission Copyright Elsevier, 2015.
Fig. 5 Schematic representation of laser-assisted bioprinting.62
Reprinted with permission Copyright IOP Publishing, 2014.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineliver tissue organoids.68In this work, using MHDS, they
carried out a layer-by-layer deposition of cells and other bio-
logical materials simultaneously and then integrated the 3D-bioprinted construct with a microfluidic system. Alginate
bioinks with concentrations ranging from 1.5 –3% (w/v) were
used for encapsulating hepatocytes, but no significant di ﬀer-
ence was found in drug metabolism studies when di ﬀerent
alginate concentrations were used. They also compared a static
culture with a perfusion culture and observed significantlyincreased metabolism levels for the perfused system. Alginate
was mixed with a synthetic polymer PCL to create a hybrid
material with enhanced mechanical properties and was thenbioprinted using inkjet bioprinting. In this study, a MHDS was
first used to print the PCL frame, where the gaps in that frame
were subsequently filled by bioprinting alginate laden withcells and growth factors. It was shown that this hybrid bioink
system supported cartilage regeneration both in vitro and
in vivo .
69Schuurman et al. successfully used the same
approach for bioprinting and demonstrated the encapsulation
of chondrocytes with an alginate –PCL hybrid material.70
A bioink made of alginate containing fibroblasts could also
be used to fabricate complex patterns of tubes using inkjet bio-
printing.71The group used drop-on-demand inkjet printing
and vertically bioprinted cell-laden zigzag tubes with highpost-printing cell viability and also found that the maximum
height of the bioprinted tubes could be determined by the
inclination angle of the construct. Using the same bioprintingsetup, the group investigated the e ﬀect of cell concentrations
on droplet formation and on the bioprinting process.
72In
addition, they compared the e ﬀect of soft particles (cells) and
hard particles (polystyrene microbeads) on droplet formation
and on the properties of the bioprinted structures. It was
found that factors such as increasing the cell concentrationsand using cells instead of microbeads decreased the diameter
of the droplets, reduced the dispensing velocity, and increased
the breakup time. Mobed-Miremadi et al. used alginate as a
bioink to encapsulate bacteria to obtain miniature spherical
microbeads using inkjet bioprinting.
73They reported rheologi-
cal characterization and optimum operating conditions tocreate miniaturized beads utilizing bioprinting.
In summary, due to its capability for fast physical gelation
and broadly tunable viscosity, alginate has become the mostwidely used natural polymer for bioprinting and is probably
the most common material of choice in proof-of-concept
studies for in vivo applications. However, alginate is a relatively
biologically inert material as indicated by the fact that it does
not possess cell-adhesive moieties, consequently leading to
limited cell attachment. To address this issue for bioprintingapplications, Jia et al. chemically modified alginate by an oxi-
dation process.
55After the oxidation step, they conjugated
RGD peptides onto alginate to allow bioactivity and promotecell binding sites. They studied di ﬀerent concentrations and
oxidation rates and found that these modified alginate-based
bioinks supported the growth and spreading of human ASCsafter bioprinting. The tunability of these bioinks could be
useful in meeting tissue-specific requirements for di ﬀerent 3Dbioprinting applications. Furthermore, it is common to use
composite materials to fulfill the physicochemical require-
ments of di ﬀerent tissues and organs. While alginate alone or
its modified forms can be used as bioinks for di ﬀerent bio-
printing applications, alginate has also been combined with
other biomaterials to create composite bioink formulations.Some of these materials include HA, fibrin, thrombin, col-
lagen, gelatin, agarose, Matrigel, genetically engineered phage,
as well as nanoparticles such as HAp and magnetic iron oxideparticles, which are discussed in other sections of this review
where applicable.
Gellan gum is a hydrophilic and high-molecular weight
anionic polysaccharide produced by bacteria. Similar to algi-
nate, it forms a hydrogel at low temperatures when blended
with monovalent or divalent cations.
74It has been approved by
the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) as a
direct food additive75and is widely used in the food and
pharmaceutical industries as a gelling agent and stabilizer aswell as in regenerative medicine applications as a viable sub-
strate for the engineering of tissues. From a bioprinting per-
spective, gellan gum has been combined with other polymersto prepare bioinks with attractive rheological properties and to
improve the shape fidelity of the bioprinted constructs.
76,77
The viscosity controls the resolution of the printed structures
and drastically a ﬀects the printing of pre-defined 3D con-
structs.78Moreover, gellan gum is relatively inexpensive to
produce, and has fine processability and tunable mechanicalproperties that are important for bioprinting processes.
79
Melchels et al. combined low-concentration gellan gum
with GelMA as the bioink, utilizing the favorable bioactive pro-perties of GelMA and the overall improved printability and cell
response of the composite.
77This composite bioink was mixed
with a salt solution to induce the formation of a gel-like struc-ture by the ionic network formed between the gellan gum
chains and the interactions between the negatively charged
gellan gum residues and the positively charged GelMA resi-dues. The second cross-linking step was done by decreasing
the temperature, which enabled the physical cross-linking of
GelMA. Finally, to fix the bioprinted construct, GelMA wasfurther chemically cross-linked utilizing UV. The results con-
cluded that the addition of the gellan gum improved the vis-
cosity and hence the printability of the bioink and did notaﬀect the microstructure of the construct or the survival of
osteoblastic cells. In another similar study, gellan gum was
mixed with GelMA to prepare a bioink and the mixture wasused for the encapsulation of chondrocytes. Additionally, sacri-
ficial layers consisting of poly(vinyl alcohol) (PVA), PCL, and
alginate were used to support the bioprinted construct. Thesesacrificial layers were deposited at the same time with the
bioink and were then removed after bioprinting by immersing
in aqueous solutions. Cell-laden constructs with clinically rele-vant dimensions were successfully fabricated by this multi-
step printing approach.
80The same group combined a gellan
gum –GelMA bioink mixture with MSC-laden polylactide micro-
carriers.81The microcarriers improved the mechanical
strength of the hydrogel mixture, while the bioprinted bilayerReview Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinecylindrical grafts supported cell viability, spreading, and osteo-
genic di ﬀerentiation. The overall results suggested that the
gellan gum had no negative e ﬀect on cell growth and di ﬀeren-
tiation and was safe to use as a supportive bioink. In a recent
study, gellan gum was combined with RGD peptide, and the
mixture was used as a novel hybrid bioink, whereby primaryneural cells were encapsulated in this bioink for the 3D bio-
printing of constructs to obtain brain-like structures with dis-
crete layers.
79An extrusion-based hand-held bioprinting tech-
nique was used to obtain multilayer cortical structures. This
hand-held method was developed for practical use in cell
culture studies without the need for a sophisticated bioprint-ing device. They observed that the incorporation of RGD sites
into the gellan gum induced cell growth and network for-
mation compared with the results obtained from gellan gumalone. Therefore, this bioink seemed promising for creating
biomimetic 3D structures.
HA is a non-sulfated glycosaminoglycan found in the
natural ECM. It plays a substantial role in synovial fluid, vitr-
eous humor, and hyaline cartilage.
82When dissolved in water,
HA solution has a viscous property, making it a promisingmaterial for applications in tissue engineering.
83In addition
to its advantageous properties in engineering bone and carti-
lage tissue constructs, HA provides a means to produce solu-tions with low viscosity since it was reported that when the
shear rate increases, there is a need for a longer relaxation
time for HA molecules to reorient, thus causing the loss of vis-cosity.
84It is also suitable for bioprinting applications where
good rheological properties and high viscosity are required
as it was noted that when the concentration and molecularweight of HA are higher, the viscosity of HA solutions are
found to increase.
84In a recent study, to create an osteochon-
dral interface, two rectangular sections were printed with PCLas the support. One part was filled by bioprinting chondro-
cytes/osteoblasts encapsulated in an HA hydrogel mixed with
alginate, while the other part was encapsulated with collagentype I.
85The viability of the encapsulated cells was next evalu-
ated. The results demonstrated that the osteoblasts encapsu-
lated in collagen I hydrogel had more than 90% viability andshowed a higher expression of osteogenic markers (Runt-
related transcription factor 2 [RUNX2] and alkaline phospha-
tase [ALP]) than osteoblasts encapsulated in the HA-basedhydrogel. On the other hand, chondrocytes cultured on the
HA-based hydrogels showed higher expression levels of chon-
drogenic markers (collagen II and aggrecan) than those cul-tured in collagen I hydrogel, implying that di ﬀerent cell
lineages require di ﬀerent bioink formulations to function
properly. Methacrylated HA (HAMA), a photocross-linkableform of HA, was utilized to prepare trileaflet valve constructs.
41
In this study, a 3D bioprinter with a dual syringe system was
used to obtain bioprinted heart valves. The root of a heartvalve was printed by using a hydrogel without cells, and sub-
sequently leaflets of the valves were printed with HAMA-GelMA
hydrogels containing human aortic valvular interstitial cells. Itwas reported that the bioprinted heart valves had high cell via-
bility (>90%), aided by the deposition of an ECM matrix con-sisting of collagen and glyosaminoglycans. In another study, a
methacrylated ethanolamide derivative of gelatin (GeMA) and
HAMA were used with human hepatocellular carcinoma cells,human intestinal epithelial cells, and murine fibroblasts as
the bioink for bioprinting.
40In vitro cell biocompatibility
results showed that a mixture of GeMA and HAMA hydrogelssupported the attachment and proliferation of the cells. In this
study, cell-free sca ﬀolds or human hepatocellular carcinoma
cells-loaded hydrogels were bioprinted and tubular constructswere formed by using an extrusion-based system, with UV
irradiation applied to chemically cross-link GeMA and HAMA.
It was observed that the cells attached only to the parts of thehydrogel that contained GeMA and HAMA together but did not
attach to the parts consisting of HAMA alone. The same group
studied gold nanoparticles (AuNPs) and thiol-modified poly-mers derived from HA and gelatin as printable semi-synthetic
ECM (sECM) hydrogels. The AuNPs here were used as active
multivalent cross-linkers for thiol-modified HA and gelatin. Inthe bioprinting process, cell-containing and cell-free bioinks
were used to make tubular structures with a polymer solution
of AuNPs-thiol-modified HA and thiol-modified gelatin in avertical ring shape.
86Human hepatocellular carcinoma cells,
human intestinal epithelial cells, and murine fibroblasts were
cultured on AuNPs-sECM hydrogels, and the viability resultsshowed ≥95% cell viability at both day 3 and day 7. During
and after bioprinting, the cell-laden sECM hydrogels main-
tained their shapes. GelMA and GelMA-HA hydrogels were alsoused with a BioSca ﬀolder dispensing system to create chondro-
genic structures.
27The physical properties of the GelMA hydro-
gels were modified by changing the UV exposure time, the con-centration of the hydrogels, and the incorporation of mechani-
cally supportive polymers, such as PCL. After 3 days, the viabi-
lity of the chondrocytes seeded on bioprinted GelMA andGelMA-HA sca ﬀolds were found to be around 73% and 82%,
respectively. Kesti et al. used a glycosaminoglycan-based hydro-
gel system by mixing poly( N-isopropylacrylamide)-grafted HA
(HA-pNIPAAM) with HAMA to obtain a versatile structure with
a thermoresponsive polymer and a photocross-linkable
polymer in the hydrogel mixture (Fig. 6).
87A BioFactory bio-
printer, which is a MHDS, was equipped with temperature
control and a UV-light source and was used to bioprint bioink
layers consisting of bovine chondrocytes encapsulated in thehydrogel. Cell viability studies revealed that embedding the
cells in the bioink caused cell death, while after removal of the
HA-pNIPAAM, they observed high cell viability, most probablybecause of the formation of pores and improved di ﬀusion.
Dextran is another natural polysaccharide that has been
widely used in tissue engineering applications, since it is non-toxic and hydrophilic. Dextran can be degraded in mammalian
tissues by dextranase, hence it is classified as a biodegradable
material.
88Pescosolido et al. utilized HA and methacrylated
dextran (dexHEMA) to prepare hydrogels that possessed a poly-
saccharidic semi-interpenetrating polymer network.89In this
study, a pneumatic dispensing system with a motorized stagewas used and equine chondrocytes were encapsulated inside
the bioink. The results showed that the HA-dexHEMA mixturesBiomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinehad attractive viscoelastic and pseudoplastic features as a
bioink and may be used in various bioprinting applications.
Agarose is a polysaccharide extracted from marine algae
and seaweed. It is widely used in molecular biology especially
for electrophoresis applications as well as in tissue engineer-
ing because of its gelling property.90In a recent bioprinting
study, primary bladder SMCs were embedded inside a collagen
gel and then the mixture was printed as droplets.19To prepare
a collagen-coated structure, an empty Petri dish was firstcoated with agarose and then with a layer of collagen. Cell-con-
taining collagen droplets were bioprinted on a collagen layer.
The results indicated high cell viabilities of approximately95%. In addition, it was observed that the cells inside the bio-
printed constructs started to express transmembrane protein
connexin-43, which has important functions in intercellularcommunication. Neufurth et al. used a mixture of alginate –
gelatin –SaOS2 cells as the bioink for 3D bioprinting.
30After
bioprinting, the cells were supplemented with polyP.Ca2+and
with/without osteogenic cocktail. The inclusion of polyP.Ca2+
significantly increased cell proliferation. In another study,agarose with a low melting point and alginate with low vis-cosity were utilized to prepare a bioink.
91Human osteosar-
coma cells were used for cell patterning studies and the cells
were mixed with melted agarose gels and then kept at 36 °Cfor bioprinting. Mouse fibroblasts were mixed with alginate for
extrusion-based bioprinting. The bioprinted constructs were
submerged in a high-density fluorocarbon liquid to supporttheir shape. Individual drops of the cell-laden hydrogels were
bioprinted layer-by-layer to prepare a 3D tissue construct. Cell
viability results showed that the viability after 1, 4, and 7 daysfollowing bioprinting were 96%, 99%, and 97%, respectively.
Human MSCs with an osteosarcoma origin were also encapsu-
lated in an agarose hydrogel.
92Next, the prepared bioink was
submerged and bioprinted inside a hydrophobic perfluorotri-
butylamine fluid with a high density, where the process sup-
ported the bioprinted construct mechanically (Fig. 7). Theresults showed that the cells were viable 24 h after bioprinting
and after 21 days in culture. Xu et al. further investigated
E. coli as a porogen factor in an agarose hydrogel.93To gene-
rate microfluidic channels, the E. coli –agarose mixture was bio-
printed onto a Petri dish pre-coated with a layer of agarose.Next, the hydrogel structure was treated with sodium dodecyl
sulfate and the E. coli debris was then removed. Murine
embryonic fibroblasts were seeded on porous agarose sca ﬀolds
and their viability was evaluated. Fibroblasts cultured on 1%
agarose gels became confluent after 6 days, while the ones cul-
Fig. 6 The gelation process of HA grafted with pNIPAAM.87Reprinted with permission Copyright Elsevier, 2014.
Fig. 7 Robotic and manual printing of 3D constructs by using an
agarose bioink under ﬂuorocarbon. (a) Top and (b) side view of printed
cell-laden constructs. (c) 3D construct mimicking a vascular bifurcation
that was printed while submerged in per ﬂuorotributylamine. (d) Printed
cylinders without cells.92Reprinted with permission Copyright IOP
Publishing, 2013.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinetured on 2% agarose gels became confluent after 14 days.
Their results demonstrated that the cells stayed alive for 2
weeks on these sca ﬀolds.
Chitosan is another biocompatible and biodegradable poly-
saccharide with anti-bacterial and wound healing properties.94
Chitosan can be obtained by the partial deacetylation of chitin
and can also be used as a gel-forming material. Due to these
properties, it is a promising biomaterial for tissue engineering
applications.95,96Duarte Campos et al. studied the e ﬀects of
bioprinted collagen, agarose, collagen –agarose, and chitosan –
agarose hydrogels on human MSCs and the di ﬀerentiation of
cells into osteogenic or adipogenic lineage.20After 21 days of
incubation, live/dead staining showed that the cell viabilities
were more than 95% for all the groups. The results demon-
strated that in a sti ﬀcollagen matrix, the cells tended to di ﬀer-
entiate into the osteogenic lineage, while in a soft agarose
matrix, the cells mostly di ﬀerentiated into adipogenic tissues.
2.3. dECM-based bioinks
Decellularization is a process used to remove the cellular com-
ponents of tissues and organs by using chemical agents as
well as by physical and mechanical processes.97To perform
decellularization, many agents have been proposed in the lit-erature, including for instance, non-ionic, ionic, and zwitter-
ionic detergents as well as enzymatic and physical agents.
97,98
For novel bioink formulations that are tissue-specific,
Pati et al. developed dECM-based bioinks to mimic specific
natural environments of various tissue types.99They success-fully obtained high cell survival rates and cell line-specific gene
expression and ECM formation with bioprinted decellularized
adipose, heart, and cartilage tissue structures. The bioprintingprocess for dECM bioinks is shown in Fig. 8. The same group
prepared a decellularized adipose tissue matrix by using
sodium dodecyl sulfate, where the decellularized matrix wasused to encapsulate the ASCs (Fig. 9).
100DNA quantification
showed that most of the DNA content was removed after decel-
lularization with less than 3% DNA content remaining. A bio-printing system with six printheads was used to extrude dECM
and PCL at the same time, where PCL was used as a framework
to print the cell-laden decellularized adipose tissue matrix. Inanother study, Skardal et al. used Triton X-100 to obtain dECM
from skeletal muscle, liver, and cardiac tissues. dECM was
mixed with the hydrogel solution and transferred into the car-tridge of the bioprinter.
101In the hydrogel bioink solution,
4-arm and 8-arm PEG or PEG diacrylate (PEGDA) was used
with thiolated HA or thiolated gelatin to provide for cross-linking reactions between the acrylate and thiol groups during
the first cross-linking step (Fig. 10). After the first cross-linking
step, UV was applied to induce secondary cross-linking toform a stable hydrogel structure. To analyze the functionality
of the bioprinted liver constructs, primary human liver spher-
oids were used in the hydrogel prepolymer solution, where theprinted tissue construct produced detectable levels of albumin
and urea.
Matrigel is a reconstituted basement membrane extracted
from the mouse sarcoma ECM and includes essential bioactive
Fig. 8 Utilizing various dECM bioinks for bioprinting 3D tissue constructs. (a) Heart tissue construct was printed with only heart dECM (hdECM).
(b) Cartilage and adipose tissues were printed with cartilage dECM (cdECM) and (c) adipose dECM (adECM), respectively, and in combination with
PCL framework (scale bar, 5 mm).99Reprinted with permission Copyright Nature Publishing Group, 2014.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinemolecules, such as laminin, collagen, and a set of growth
factors.102,103It serves as a natural biomimetic ECM and is
widely used in cell and tissue cultures, where it undergoes
thermal cross-linking at higher temperatures.104,105
Poldervaart et al. used Matrigel in combination with alginate
as a bioink for vascularization studies.106Similar to other
studies, alginate was added to improve the printability ofMatrigel. They also incorporated vascular endothelial growth
factor (VEGF) into the bioink either directly or within micro-
spheres, which enabled its controlled release. They used a bio-printer with a pneumatic dispensing system for the bioprint-
ing of human EPC-laden hybrid constructs. The results
revealed that, although the addition of alginate improved bio-printing, the degradation rates increased and the rate of for-
mation of vessel-like structures decreased, implying that the
types of materials and their ratios are critical parameters toadjust when developing an optimum bioink. Matrigel has also
been used for bioprinting a drug discovery platform as part of
a microfluidic system.
103Here, the research group used an
extrusion-based system for bioprinting hepatocyte-laden or
epithelial cell-laden bioinks and designed a temperature con-
troller to prevent thermal gelation of the Matrigel before bio-printing. With this novel system, they successfully fabricated
functional dual tissue constructs (hepatocyte and epithelial
tissue) and evaluated their synergistic e ﬀect under radiation
tests for space applications. In other applications, Matrigel
was used as a biopaper for coating the surfaces to support bio-printed cells
63,104or for bioprinting it to the surface without
cells for post-printing cell seeding.105However, the major
issue associated with Matrigel is that it is obtained from
murine sarcoma cells and hence its suitability for clinicaltranslation may be limited.
12
2.4. Synthetic polymer-based bioinks
PEG is a synthetic polymer synthesized by ethylene oxide
polymerization, which can be prepared with di ﬀerent chain
lengths as well as di ﬀerent structures, such as linear or multi-
armed structures. It is a favorable synthetic material because
of its tailorable but typically strong mechanical properties that
facilitate the bioprinting processes and shape maintenance ofthe deposited constructs. Non-cytotoxicity (at higher molecular
weights) and non-immunogenicity are the other advantages of
PEG. On the other hand, it is a bioinert material that the cellscannot readily attach to,
107,108and therefore it needs to be
combined with other biologically active hydrogels. Indeed,
composites of PEG and natural biomaterials have been shownto improve the degradation properties of PEG-based con-
structs.
36,49In addition, even though PEG is generally accepted
to be non-immunogenic, there are several clinical studieswhere PEG-specific antibodies have been found in patients
treated with PEGylated therapeutic enzymes.
109
Rutz et al. utilized PEG to develop tunable bioink formu-
lations with a wide range of mechanical and rheological pro-
perties.49They produced PEG with reactive groups (PEGX), and
Fig. 9 Adipose tissue obtained by surgery and used as a bioink after a decellularization process for soft tissue reconstruction.100Reprinted with per-
mission Copyright Elsevier, 2015.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinefound that with this modification, the PEG became the cross-
linker for various natural materials viathe conjugated amine
groups (Fig. 11). They successfully established processes forbioprinting PEGX-PEG, PEGX-gelatin, PEGX-gelatin-fibrinogen,
and PEGX-gelatin-atelocollagen bioinks containing di ﬀerent
types of cells. The results suggested that the PEG modificationprocess is a valuable tool to tune the bioink ’s properties,
increase the bioink options, and to control the cell responses.
Similar to gelatin, PEG can also be used in a photopolymeriz-able form, such as PEGDA, and can be cross-linked vialight
irradiation. Skardal et al. used 4-arm PEG-tetracrylate (PEGTA)
as a bioink that was cross-linked with thiolated polymers andthen compared its performance with PEGDA.
110In this study,
the PEG derivatives were blended with HA and gelatin and
cross-linked with the amine groups of these polymers, leadingto the bioprinting of sti ﬀer tubular constructs. They concluded
that the PEGTA form displayed better results than PEGDA in
terms of the rheological properties and extrusion ability andalso had better cell response for certain cell types. Moreover,
these properties could be further tailored by changing the
molecular weight of PEG. The cross-linking of PEGTA is asimple method and seems promising for preparing new bioink
formulations. In another study, PEGDA was used as a bioinkfor bioprinting bone tissue constructs.
111For the encapsula-
tion of MSCs, the group used PEGDA alone or PEGDA mixed
with bioactive glass (BG), HAp, or BG-HAp and compared thecellular performance in these bioinks. The bioprinted
PEGDA-HAp constructs showed better bone tissue functional-
ity than PEGDA-BG with respect to ALP activity and collagensecretion, together with higher cell viability and mechanical
strength. Recently, Hong et al. blended PEGDA with alginate as
the bioink and utilized both chemical and ionic cross-linkingto significantly enhance the mechanical properties of the bio-
printed constructs.
112They also encapsulated MSCs in this
bioink and obtained tough and stretchable cell-laden con-structs using dual cross-linking. They successfully bioprinted
various sophisticated 3D shapes, including ear, nose, and
hollow cubes, where all the constructs showed good cell survi-val properties (Fig. 12).
Standardization of the evaluation of the printing and of
the rheological properties is a critical need in bioprinting.Recently, a few studies were focused on the printability
and rheological properties of PEG-based and/or poloxamer-
based bioinks. Poloxamers are block copolymers of PEGand poly(propylene glycol) (PPG).
113In one study, poloxamer
407, a commercially available hydrophilic non-ionic surfactant,
Fig. 10 Employing multiple PEG-based bioinks with tunable cross-linking properties. (a) Strategy of formulation of printable bioinks comprised of
acrylate-based cross-linkers (crosslinker 1), alkyne-based cross-linkers (crosslinker 2), thiolated HA, thiolated gelatin, and unmodi ﬁed HA and gelatin.
(b) Implementation of bioprintable hydrogel bioinks: the bioink formulation was prepared and spontaneously cross-linked through thiol-acrylate
binding, resulting in a soft, extrudable material. Lastly, the bioprinted structures were fused, stabilized, and brought to the target sti ﬀness.101
Reprinted with permission Copyright Elsevier, 2015.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinean alginate-based hydrogel, and an alginate –gelatin composite
hydrogel were used to analyze the rheological properties ofbioinks.
114Hydrogels encapsulating MSCs were bioprinted by
using a multi-headed 3D extrusion-based bioprinter. A stress
ramp was used to evaluate the yield stress of the mentionedbioinks. The rheological behavior of the bioinks was analyzed
using a rheometer and a mathematical model. The flowinitiation properties, degree of shear thinning, yield stress, cell
survival, and recovery behaviors of the bioinks after bioprint-ing were used to evaluate the rheological properties. The
results showed that no significant reduction was observed in
cell viability between the high- and low-shear samples duringbioprinting, indicating that shear rates of up to 1639 s
−1did
not impact the cell viability (between bioprinting pressures of
Fig. 11 PEG-based cell-laden bioinks. (a) Polymer or polymer mixtures in linear (gelatin), branched (4-arm PEG amine), or multifunctional form.
The red circles represent amines, blue triangles represent methacrylate groups, and the yellow stars indicate SVA groups of PEGX. (b) PEGX can be
linear or multiarm and can have various chain lengths. (c) Cells can be encapsulated by (d) mixing with polymers and PEGX to form the bioink.
(e) Alternatively, secondary cross-linking can be performed to increase mechanical strength following the printing step. (f) By changing the react ive
groups of PEGX, polymers of other functional groups can be cross-linked. Purple polygons represent thiols, cross-linkable with maleimide PEGX
(pink squares) and green ellipses represent alkynes, cross-linkable with azide PEGX (orange pentagon). (g) Printing process of PEGX bioink method
and corresponding phase: PEGX with or without cells were mixed within the polymer solution and loaded into the printing cartridge. After gel for-mation and stable mechanical properties were achieved, gels could be 3D printed into multilayer constructs.
49Reprinted with permission Copyright
John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2015.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online1 bar to 5 bar). It was pointed out that the susceptibility of
outer cells at the needle edge would be higher when the shearlevel was higher than 1639 s
−1and therefore this could be the
reason for the reduction in cell viability. This study revealed
that both the residence time of the cells and the shear rateduring bioprinting should be considered to improve cell viabi-
lity. In another study, an extrusion-based bioprinter was used
to evaluate the shape fidelity of bioinks viathe filament fusion
of parallel-bioprinted strands, together with the collapse of the
extruded filaments on overhanging structures.
115Blends of
PEG and poloxamer 407-based hydrogels were used to analyzethe shape fidelity of bioinks where a rheometer was utilized to
carry out rheological studies. The results showed that anincrease in the concentration of PEG and at the same time a
decrease in the concentration of poloxamer 407 led to adecrease in both yield stress and viscosity of between 30% and
20% of the poloxamer concentration. In the filament collapse
test, it was demonstrated that filament bending increasedwhen the gap length was increased. Furthermore, the yield
stress increased when the concentration of poloxamer
increased, which led to a decrease in bending of the bio-printed constructs. This study revealed that yield stress is an
important factor in the shape fidelity of hydrogels after print-
ing. To investigate cell viability during extrusion bioprintingand after bioink curing, Dubbin et al. used PEGDA, GelMA,
and a novel bioink, recombinant-protein alginate platform for
Fig. 12 Rigid and biocompatible PEG-alginate-nanoclay blend bioinks and di ﬀerent 3D bioprinted constructs. (a) Various 3D constructs were
printed using a bioink (from left to right: hollow cube, hemisphere, pyramid, twisted bundle, the shape of an ear, and a nose with food dye). (b) Amesh made of hydrogels was printed and was used to host HEK cells. (c) Viability of cells in a collagen hydrogel infused into the 3D printed mesh of
the PEG-alginate-nanoclay bioink material. (d) Viability of the cells through 7 d culture. (e) A printed bilayer mesh (top layer red, bottom layer gre en)
was uniaxially stretched up to three times of its initial length. Relaxation of the sample after stretching shows almost complete recovery of its orig inal
shape. (f) A printed pyramid underwent a compressive strain of 95% while returning to its original shape after relaxation.
112Reprinted with per-
mission Copyright John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2015.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineinjectable dual-cross-linked ink (RAPID ink).116The recombi-
nant protein, C7 (peptide C), was a component of the RAPID
ink and the other component was alginate, which was co-valently modified with peptide P. Even though the C and P
peptides could form a weak network, the main cross-linking
occurred when alginate was exposed to Ca
2+. The results
showed that less than 10% of the fibroblasts were damaged in
the GelMA and PEGDA bioinks; however, in the RAPID bioink,
fewer than 4% of the cells were damaged during bioprinting.In addition, it was demonstrated that more than 50% of the
cells at the edges of the bioprinted GelMA and PEGDA droplets
were damaged after UV light exposure for 5 min. On the otherhand, less than 20% of the cells were damaged on the edges of
the RAPID bioink after 5 min of exposure in a CaCl
2solution.
The observation of reduction in cell death during exposure toa CaCl
2solution was explained by possible prevention of cell
dehydration in the solution.
Pluronic is a type of poloxamer and is utilized as a material
in bioprinting for generating sacrificial structures.39It has
good printability and temperature-responsive gelation that are
well-suited for use in bioinks.15As such, Pluronic can be easily
washed away after printing if necessary, as it liquefies at a
temperature of 4 °C or lower.15While Pluronic has been widely
used as sacrificial bioink, its biocompatibility is not su ﬃcient
to support long-term cell survival, which limits its direct use
as a regular bioink for cell culture. In a recent study, Müller
et al. reported a strategy termed nanostructuring, which
enabled increasing the biocompatibility of Pluronic.117In this
method, they mixed acrylated and unmodified Pluronic and
then removed the unmodified molecules after UV cross-linking, resulting in a significant increase in the viability of
the encapsulated chondrocytes of up to 2 weeks in culture due
to the increased porosity with the removal. On the other hand,the mechanical strength of the fabricated construct was found
to be low, but could be successfully increased by the addition
of HAMA. These results suggested that Pluronic can be poten-tially combined with various polymers and utilized for the bio-
printing of di ﬀerent tissue constructs.
In addition to PEG and Pluronic, there are some other syn-
thetic hydrogel-forming polymers that have been used as bioinks
in recent studies. In one of these investigations, methacry-
lated poly[ N-(2-hydroxypropyl)methacrylamide mono/dilactate]
(pHPMA-lac)/PEG triblock copolymers were mixed with HAMA
and used as a bioink.
118This bioink was utilized for the optim-
ization of cartilage-like tissue formation, and PCL was alsoused for mechanical support during bioprinting. A commercial
extrusion-based bioprinter (3D Discovery bioprinter), which
had pneumatic robotic dispensers, was used for bioprintingthe constructs. In addition to varying the internal geometries
viabioprinting, di ﬀerent variations and concentrations of
these polymers were tested and it was found that there was adose-dependent e ﬀect of HA on the ECM production of chon-
drocytes. Their observations showed that pHPMA-lac-PEG
hydrogels with 0.5% HAMA were optimal for cartilage-liketissue regeneration. Co-printing the hydrogel with PCL and the
presence of HAMA increased the sti ﬀness of the constructs toa value close to that of the native cartilage. In another paper,
thiol-functionalized HA cross-linked with allyl-functionalized
poly(glycidol)s (P(AGE- co-G)) was used as a bioink to obtain
constructs of articular cartilage tissue.
119Poly(glycidol)s (PG)
have a similar chemical structure to PEGs but possess extra
side groups, which enables additional functionalization. Forthe bioprinting process, an extrusion-based bioprinter was used.
It was found that PG-based bioinks combined with HA showed
an improvement in cell viability and di ﬀerentiation with
respect to the PG-only bioinks. In a recent study, polyvinylpyr-
rolidone (PVP) was investigated as a bioink candidate.
120
Diﬀerent concentrations of PVP (0 –3% w/v) were used for bio-
printing the constructs with a commercial inkjet bioprinter
(RegenHU Biofactory). Their results proved that the addition of
PVP improved the printability of the cell mixture. Furthermore,PVP displayed a positive impact on the survival and hom-
ogenous dispersion of the bioprinted cells. This study was the
first to use PVP as the bioink.
2.5. Commercial bioinks
There are a few commercial biomaterials that have been
recently introduced. For instance, Dermamatrix is a commer-
cial natural biomaterial. It is derived from human skin as an
allograft consisting of acellular dermis, and it has been used asa biopaper in bioprinting.
121Another commercial hydrogel is
NovoGel, which is a biologically inert material, and this was
utilized in bioprinting processes, whereupon printed sacrificialrods formed vessel-like channels
122similar to the use of
agarose rods,38or as a printed supportive material for the sim-
ultaneous deposition of vessel-mimicking constructs.123
More recently, another commercial bioink named CELLINK
was introduced. The company provides application-specific,
ready-to-use bioinks, on demand. Some of the types ofCELLINK bioinks are composed of GelMA, alginate and highly
hydrated cellulose nanofibrils, calcium and phosphorous, PCL
and Pluronic. Their promise in bioprinting applications weredemonstrated in some recent studies. For instance, anatomi-
cally shaped cartilage structures were bioprinted successfully
and chondrocytes exhibited higher viability rates during theculture period
124 –126and supported redi ﬀerentiation of the
cells and the synthesis of cartilage ECM.126
3. Cell aggregate/pellet-based
bioinks
It is becoming increasingly common to use cell pellets or
aggregates to prepare bioinks to carry out sca ﬀold-free tissue
fabrication. For example, spherical aggregates of Chinese
hamster ovary (CHO) cells were prepared and dispensed into
micropipettes.22In this study, the micropipettes served as car-
tridges for the bioprinter. During the bioprinting process, one
cartridge contained cellular aggregates and another contained
collagen gel as the matrix material. A square collagen bed wasfirst created by the bioprinter, and then the cell aggregates
were bioprinted into the collagen bed in a square or hexagonalReview Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineshape. CHO cells were also used in another bioprinting study
by the same research group.21In this work, the cell pellets
were first transferred into capillary tubes to form firm cylin-ders of cells; the cylinders were then removed from the capil-
lary tubes and cut into fragments. Fragments of the cell pellets
were subsequently placed on a gyratory shaker inside a cellculture medium to prepare spherical aggregates. Commercial
NeuroGel (a biocompatible porous poly[ N-(2-hydroxypropyl)
methacrylamide] hydrogel) disks containing RGD and collagentype I were bioprinted with the cell aggregates. Staining results
showed minimal cell death after the fusion of aggregates. The
same group also used chicken cardiomyocytes, CHOs, andhuman vascular endothelial cells to prepare spheroidal
bioinks.
127The aggregates of a mixture of cardiac and endo-
thelial cells were bioprinted onto the collagen gel matrix con-taining VEGF. Synchronous beating was observed 90 h post-
bioprinting. Fig. 13 shows the bioprinting process of the
spheroidal bioinks.
128
Similarly, cell pellets formed from CHOs were used as a
bioink, whereby a thermal inkjet bioprinter and ink cartridge
were used for depositing cell pellets on collagen type I bio-paper.
23In the apoptosis study, it was observed that there was
no significant di ﬀerence in viability ratios between printed
and non-printed cells; in both cases the cell viabilities wereclose to 90%. A thermal inkjet bioprinter was further used to
print cell aggregates from murine MSCs and non-metastatic
murine mammary cancer cell lines.129During the bioprinting
process, ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA) was used to
avoid salt crystallization as well as cell aggregation. Cell viabi-
lity studies showed that the addition of EDTA did not causesignificant cell death. Cell pellets containing MSCs and
Schwann cells with a ratio of 90% to 10% were transferred into
capillary tubes and extruded into wells molded fromagarose.
130The cellular cylinders were bioprinted by using a
bioprinter with a geometrical structure customized to study a
rat sciatic nerve injury model. In vivo results demonstrated that
there was an extensive axonal re-growth at both the proximal
and distal ends of the nerve conduit through the bioprinted
grafts. Pellets of mouse embryonic fibroblast cells were trans-ferred into tubes and then transferred into glass capillaries by
a continuous bioprinting process (Fig. 14).
123To analyze apop-
tosis during bioprinting, apoptotic cell markers were examinedwith immunoblotting. It was shown that there was no acti-
vation of caspase-3 in the continuously bioprinted bioink of
ring-shaped cells where caspase-3 was used as an apoptoticcell marker.
Spheroids of human embryonic stem cells could be bio-
printed as well. For example, they were deposited with a
Fig. 13 Use of cell-aggregate-based bioinks and related bioprinting strategies. (a) Bioprinter (general view); (b) multiple bioprinter nozzles;
(c) tissue spheroids based bioink before dispensing; (d) tissue spheroids during dispensing; (e) continuous dispensing in air; (f) continuous disp ensing
inﬂuid; (g) digital dispensing in air; (h) digital dispensing in ﬂuid; (i) scheme of bioassembly of tubular tissue constructs using bioprinting of self-
assembled tissue spheroids illustrating sequential steps of layer-by-layer tissue spheroid deposition and tissue fusion processes.128Reprinted with
permission Copyright Elsevier, 2009.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinedouble nozzle system using two di ﬀerent bioink formu-
lations, where one bioink included human embryonic stem
cells in the medium and the other one only included the
medium.131Cells were cultured in a medium without growth
factors during spheroid aggregate formation, but after for-
mation of the aggregates, the medium with growth factors
was used to induce di ﬀerentiation. Aggregates of mouse
cardiac valve interstitial cells, MSCs, and dermal fibroblasts
were formed by using a hanging-drop method and incubated
with TGF- β1 or serotonin for 7 days.132After 7 days, the di ﬀer-
entiated aggregates were placed in contact with each other to
allow fusion. It was observed that the aggregates treated with
growth factors had higher fusion capacity than those withoutthe treatment of growth factors. Norotte et al. used CHOs,
SMCs, and fibroblasts to obtain vascular constructs without
scaﬀolds.
133A custom-made bioprinter with four cartridges
was used to prepare vascular structures, while spheroidal or
cylindrical vascular constructs were obtained by using multi-
cellular aggregates. Finally, the use of a quantitative systemwas suggested for rational design of the bioprinting para-
meters to improve cell viability and cell attachment.
134
Murine MSCs and non-metastatic murine mammary cancer
cell lines were bioprinted on collagen to demonstrate the
eﬀectiveness of the system. The bioprinted structures were
compared with predictions of the quantitative system and itwas concluded that the proposed system worked properly for
bioprinting applications.4. Composite bioinks/bioinks with
bioactive molecules
4.1. Composite bioinks
Nanomaterials have numerous attractive features and several
investigators have combined them into hydrogel biomaterials
for making bioinks. Skardal et al. used AuNPs as a bioink com-
ponent and exploited their thiophilicity. These nanoparticles
have an a ﬃnity to thiol-containing ligands making them
multivalent cross-linkers for thiolated molecules.86The group
blended AuNPs with thiolated HA and gelatin and encapsu-
lated fibroblasts to bioprint vascular structures by using an
extrusion-based bioprinter. The Au –thiol bonding was a slow,
reversible, and dynamic process with the availability of large
regions of interaction sites, which enabled more control over
the bioprinting process and over the mechanical strength ofthe resulting constructs. As expected, fabricated hybrid con-
structs showed good cell response. Another study utilized
silver nanoparticles (AgNPs) for bioprinting a 3D bionic ear.
135
They combined biological and conductive materials to obtain
a cyborg organ by employing an extrusion-based commercial
bioprinter. They used alginate as the base material for thebioink and mixed it with AgNPs due to their electrical conduc-
tivity and then encapsulated chondrocytes as the functional
cells. Results suggested that the bioprinted ears were able toreceive electromagnetic signals, whereas the encapsulated cells
Fig. 14 Aggregate of MEF cells used as a bioink for bioprinting an aorta-like structure while the hydrogel served as a support.123Reprinted with per-
mission Copyright John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2015.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinewere found to be metabolically active. Another study estab-
lished iron oxide magnetic nanoparticles as a bioink additive,
where the researchers mixed these particles with alginate,thereby allowing for additional control over the bioink micro-
architecture during bioprinting using a magnetic field.
78,136
They found that the nanoparticles changed the viscosity of the
bioink depending on their concentration and that the viscosity
aﬀected the nanoparticle movement. They encapsulated endo-
thelial cells within the bioink and investigated their survivalrates while changing the bioprinting parameters. They
observed that the viability within the first 36 h did not change
for the bioprinted cells without nanoparticles but the cell via-bility decreased for the bioprinted constructs with the nano-
particles. Consistent with the previous studies, increasing the
bioprinting pressure negatively a ﬀected the cell survival rates,
whereas the nozzle size did not have a clear influence on these
rates. On the other hand, the group observed that the viability
of the encapsulated cells bioprinted with and without nano-particles using high printing pressures was quite similar,
implying that the nanoparticles did not negatively a ﬀect the
rheological properties of the bioink even at higher concen-trations. Importantly, incorporation of the nanoparticles in
alginate did not impair the printing resolution, which suggests
that they are a good bioink additive, and as a bioink material,it makes them a useful tool for tracking and positioning
desired molecules within 3D bioprinted constructs after the
printing process.
Nanomaterials have been used for producing conductive
bioinks to enhance the signal transduction of embedded cells
as well. As an example, DNA was utilized as a surfactant to dis-perse carbon nanotubes (CNTs) in GelMA or HA to create bio-
compatible CNT-based bioinks (Fig. 15).
137Cytotoxicity and
cell viability results showed that the cardiomyocytes showed90% cellular viability after seeding on the printed ink. The
immunostaining results of f-actin revealed that the cells had
normal cell morphology and adhered well to the printed ink.In addition, the cells that proliferated on conductive bioinks
showed high expressions of sarcomeric α-actinin and con-
nexin-43, which are cardiomyocyte specific markers. It is alsonoteworthy that these conductive bioink formulations showed
no toxicity to the cells and also had superior electrical pro-
perties that promoted the functions of the cardiomyocytes.
137
Alternatively, bioinks blended with gold nanorods (AuNRs)
have also been shown to improve cardiac functions.138
Another class of nanomaterials is based on minerals. For
example, HAp has been mainly used in bone tissue engineer-
ing due to its supportive functions for bone growth and
osseointegration. HAp is a calcium phosphate mineral verysimilar to the inorganic components in bones in
mammals.
139,140Furthermore, HAp is also utilized in bone
bioprinting studies as an osteogenic inducer. Gao et al. used a
thermal inkjet printer with hMSCs suspended in PEG-dimeth-
acrylate nanoparticles of BG or HAp.111In the study that used
HAp, the cells showed the highest viability, and also the com-pressive modulus of the constructs was higher. The contents
of collagen and ALP were observed to be the highest. Inanother report, bone morphogenetic protein-2 (BMP-2)-incor-
porating gelatin microparticles were bioprinted with goat mul-
tipotent stromal cell-encapsulating alginate and a mixture ofHAp and tricalcium phosphate to evaluate the release of
BMP-2 and osteogenic tissue formation.
104A layer-by-layer bio-
printing was carried out by a pneumatic dispensing system.Immunohistochemical staining results demonstrated that in
the fast growth factor releasing group, osteocalcin expression
was lower than in the slow growth factor releasing group.However, micro-computed tomography (micro-CT) results
showed that the duration of the growth factor release time did
not change the bone volume significantly. In another study,HAp was mixed with gelatin and alginate, whereupon a two-
step mechanism was utilized based on the reversible thermo-
sensitive gelation of gelatin and the irreversible chemical gela-tion of alginate.
32During the bioprinting process, a modified
3D bioprinter with two-syringes and a heatable printhead was
used. Here, gelatin was used as a short-term stabilizer that wasdissolved after a certain time during incubation, where the
alginate enabled long-term stability and the HAp was
employed for its osteogenic potential (Fig. 16). It was foundthat the addition of HAp to the gelatin –alginate mixture made
the composite more viscous and hence more di ﬃcult to print,
and the maximum HAp concentration that allowed proper bio-printing was reported as 8%. The results revealed that bio-
printed hMSCs showed a high cell viability of 85% after 3 days
of subsequent in vitro culture even with the higher HAp con-
centrations. It was also demonstrated that HAp-based bioinks
have favorable properties for bone tissue engineering. Catros
et al. used LaBP while assembling nano-HAp (nHAp) and
human osteoprogenitor cells in culture medium.
141It was
demonstrated that LaBP allowed the bioprinting and organiz-
ation of nHAp and human osteoprogenitor cells in two andthree dimensions. In addition, the physicochemical properties
of nHAp were preserved during LaBP and cell proliferation was
observed for 15 days. In another study, nHAp and sodium algi-nate were synthesized by wet precipitation.
142LaBP was uti-
lized by using a laser-induced forward transfer method. In this
study, polymers, namely sodium alginate, nano-sized particles,namely nHAp and human endothelial cells were printed with
this bioprinting technology. Droplets that are 70 µm in dia-
meter were obtained, with five to seven living cells encapsu-lated in each droplet.
4.2. Bioinks with bioactive molecules
Biomolecules can be blended into bioinks as well. Growth
factors are generally referred to as a group of proteins or
steroid hormones that stimulate cell di ﬀerentiation, prolifer-
ation, survival, and tissue regeneration. They can be produced
by diﬀerent types of cells, tissues, and glands.
143 –145In
general, certain groups of growth factors act on specific type oftissues, such as the BMP family, which stimulates bone-related
processes whereas the VEGF is known to stimulate the vascu-
larization process. For this reason, they are widely used intissue engineering, either as direct additives inside the
scaﬀold material or entrapped in a controlled release system,Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinesuch as microspheres. In several studies growth factors were
added to the bioink and used in bioprinting applications to
stimulate the engineered tissues. Insulin-like growth factor II(IGF-II)-, BMP-2-, and fibroblast growth factor-2 (FGF-2)-con-
taining bioinks were printed on fibrin-coated surfaces with an
inkjet deposition system.
146Myogenic cells were then seeded
on the printed structures. Desorption experiments performed
with IGF-II and BMP-2 showed that the growth factors were
retained on the samples in serum-containing medium after 10days. Studies with myogenic cells on the printed BMP-2
samples showed that there was a notable increase in their ALPexpression levels; however, on the control and FGF-2 samples,
there was no noticeable expression of ALP. Similarly, Cooper
et al. used an inkjet deposition system to bioprint human
recombinant BMP-2, noggin, growth and di ﬀerentiation factor-
5 (GDF-5), and transforming growth factor- β1 (TGF- β1) on
human acellular dermis.
121Myogenic precursor cells were
seeded on growth factor-containing substrates. The bioprint-
ing of BMP-2 was done on one half of the circular acellular
dermis, whereas the other part was left empty or bioprintedwith noggin, GDF-5, or TGF- β1. Histological analysis showed
that human acellular dermis alone did not stimulate the for-
Fig. 15 Preparation and generation of a conductive bioink. (a) A scheme of coagulation reaction of DNA/HA-coated CNT-based bioinks.
(b) Viscosity results of a conductive CNT-based bioink. (c) 3D printing of a bioink on a PDMS mold. (d) SEM image shows porous structure of the printed
samples. (e) Mechanical test results of printed ﬁbers after swelling. (f) Cyclic voltammetry curves of printed ﬁbers in PBS. (g) Impedance measurements
of printed CNT-based micro ﬁbers in PBS. (h) Structure of printed ﬁbers inside cell-laden GelMA hydrogels. (i) Top view of GelMA hydrogel shows the
printed ﬁbers inside the construct. ( j) Immunostaining results of cardiomyocytes encapsulated in GelMA after 10 days including printed ﬁbers for sarco-
meric α-actinin (green), cell nuclei (blue), and Cx-43 (red).137Reprinted with permission Copyright John Wiley & Sons, Inc., 2016.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinemation of bone tissue, whereas new bone-like structures were
formed on the BMP-2 printed sections of the construct.
Blood plasma is the ECM of blood cells consisting of a solu-
tion of salts and proteins such as fibrinogen, albumin, and
globulin.147Due to its advantage of being a natural mixture of
vital proteins and minerals, blood plasma has been utilized asa bioink. Gruene et al. combined blood plasma with alginate
for encapsulating ASCs, and fabricated 3D multilayer grafts by
using the LaBP technique.
148Experiments revealed that the
proliferation and di ﬀerentiation ability of the stem cells were
preserved after the bioprinting process. Another study utilized
the same bioprinting procedure and the same blood plasma –
alginate bioink mixture for skin tissue engineering.16They
were able to build layered structures where every single layer
was patterned with di ﬀerent cell types, and proper cellular
functionality and intercellular junction formation were
observed after bioprinting.A novel cryo (freezing) bioink was reported by El Assal et al. ,
where red blood cells (RBCs) were bioprinted as nanodroplets
for cryopreservation.149The cryo bioink included PEG, ectoine,
and trehalose molecules and served as a protective solution for
RBCs during cooling and thawing processes. The optimum
concentrations of the cryo bioink components were foundthrough experiments. The extrusion-based bioprinting system
enabled the dispensing of RBC-laden cryo bioink in the form
of droplets. The results revealed that the cellular morphologyand functions of the bioprinted patterns were successfully
maintained.
Besides proteins, ultrashort peptides, including trimer,
tetramer, and hexamers, were proposed as composite bioink
materials, and the parameters critical for bioprinting were
next evaluated.
12These materials were soluble in water even at
low temperatures and possessed stimuli-responsive gelation
and self-assembly properties, enabling them to obtain rigid
Fig. 16 (a) Schematic diagrams of the two-step gelation mechanism of bioinks: thermoresponsive gelation of gelatin and the irreversible chemical
gelation of alginate at the polymer level. (b) Printing of heated hydrogel precursor including living cells onto a cold substrate. (c) First gelation step
by decreasing the temperature, which resulted in solidi ﬁcation of the gelatin. (d) After printing the whole construct, it was immersed in a CaCl 2solu-
tion to cross-link the alginate within the hydrogel precursor mixture. This procedure was performed in a cold environment to preserve the stability
of the construct until chemical cross-linking was completed. (e) Long-term stability was ensured by the cross-linked alginate and then the cooling
plate was removed.32Reprinted with permission Copyright Elsevier, 2014.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlinehydrogels with good shape fidelity and a sti ﬀness of around 40
kPa, which is one order of magnitude greater than that of
other short-peptide-based hydrogels. Thanks to their amphi-philic structure, they could hold a large amount of water for
protecting cells from dehydration during the bioprinting
process. Furthermore, human MSCs encapsulated in peptidehydrogel droplets exhibited alignment and elongation in less
than a week and the 3D constructs presented good in vivo bio-
compatibility and stability. With these unique properties,peptide bioinks are not only suitable bioink materials for
tissue engineering but also favorable bioinks for drug delivery
and therapeutics screening applications.
Microbes may also function as bioinks. For example, geneti-
cally engineered phage was recently introduced as a new
bioink material due to its tailorable design at the molecularlevel, which enabled the research team to add the desired pro-
perties for bioprinting applications.
13Specifically, M13 phages
with their integrin-binding (GRGDS) and calcium-binding(DDYD) domains on their surfaces were mixed with alginate
for proper cross-linking in the presence of Ca
2+ions (Fig. 17).
Preosteoblasts were encapsulated in this bioink and bioprintedwith a computer-controlled three-axis robotic system and a dis-
penser. Bioprinted cell-laden constructs displayed higher
levels of cell viability, proliferation, and di ﬀerentiation than
those encapsulated in pure alginate, implying a strong poten-
tial of creating bioinks from engineered phages. Similar to
peptide bioinks, the self-assembly property, replicability, andtunable design at the molecular level are outstanding pro-
perties which can pave the way to create new bioinks in asimilar manner and could further accelerate bioprinting
applications.
5. Future remarks
Bioprinting is a promising strategy to engineer 3D tissue con-structs with precisely defined structures and geometries by
using living cells and biomaterials. Bioinks are an essentialcomponent of bioprinting and typically consist of biomaterials
(such as hydrogels), cells, or cell aggregates, or their combi-
nations. Several natural ( e.g., alginate and gelatin) and syn-
thetic ( e.g., PCL, PEG, Pluronic) polymers have been utilized as
bioinks. Although there are numerous e ﬀorts on the advance-
ment of the bioprinting technology, the development of appro-priate bioinks that satisfactorily meet bioprinting require-
ments with regards to the mechanical, rheological, and bio-
logical properties have been limited to date. Thus, the develop-ment of new bioink materials and the engineering of novel
bioink formulations are currently major areas of interest. In
addition, more work is needed in creating models and stan-dards to compare and to evaluate the properties of di ﬀerent
bioink materials. To this end, new metrics need to be devel-
oped for evaluating bioinks and bioprinting processes, whichare very important to standardize their uses. As we mentioned
above, a pioneering work has established a method to evaluate
the shape fidelity of bioinks viathe filament fusion of parallel-
bioprinted strands using an extrusion bioprinter, as well as
the filament collapse on overhanging structures.
115In
Fig. 17 The use of phages as a nanobioink. The nano- ﬁlamentous M13 bacteriophage was genetically engineered to present cell-adhesive peptides
on its major protein. (a) Target genes were inserted into the gVIII region, leading to close proximity to the N-terminus of pVIII. The resulting circul ar
DNA was then transformed into E. coli , creating the engineered M13 phages, which were identi ﬁed by DNA sequencing. (b) Schematic diagram of an
M13 phage displaying a regularly spaced, dense array of biochemical motifs, including both the integrin-binding segment (GRGDS) and the Ca2+-
binding segment (DDYD). (c) Schematic diagram of a bioink (target cells + RGD-phages + alginate) and a 3D cell-laden construct printed using the
phage-based bioink.13Reprinted with permission Copyright Elsevier, 2016.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Onlineaddition, the development of new computational models is
another area of interest to fully analyze the printability and
behaviors of the bioinks prior to experimental optimizations.In view of the above-mentioned topics, this review has pro-
vided in-depth details about the current bioinks and it is
anticipated that this will benefit the broad readership in thefield of bioprinting and tissue engineering.
Conﬂicts of interest
The authors declare no conflict of interests in this work.
Acknowledgements
P. S. G. O. acknowledges funding (B.14.2.TBT.0.06.01-219-
115543) and I. I. acknowledges funding (B.02.1.TBT.0.06.01-219-115543) from the Scientific and Technological Research
Council of Turkey (TUBITAK). This work was supported by the
National Institutes of Health (AR066193, EB021148, EB021857,AR070647, EB023052, CA214411, AR057837, HL137193, and
EB024403), the O ﬃce of Naval Research PECASE Award, the
National Science Foundation (EFRI-1240443), and theScientific and Technological Research Council of Turkey
(TUBITAK). Y. S. Z. acknowledges the National Cancer Institute
of the National Institutes of Health Pathway to IndependenceAward (CA201603) and the Science and Technology
Commission of Shanghai Municipality (STCSM) 17JC 1400200.
References
1 P. Bajaj, R. M. Schweller, A. Khademhosseini, J. L. West
and R. Bashir, Annu. Rev. Biomed. Eng. , 2014, 16, 247 –276.
2 J. Groll, T. Boland, T. Blunk, J. A. Burdick, D.-W. Cho,
P. D. Dalton, B. Derby, G. Forgacs, Q. Li, V. A. Mironov,
L. Moroni, M. Nakamura, W. Shu, S. Takeuchi, G. Vozzi,
T. B. F. Woodfield, T. Xu, J. J. Yoo and J. Malda,Biofabrication , 2016, 8, 013001.
3 S. V. Murphy and A. Atala, Nat. Biotechnol. , 2014, 32, 773 –
785.
4 Y. S. Zhang, K. Yue, J. Aleman, K. M. Mollazadeh-
Moghaddam, S. M. Bakht, V. Dell ’Erba, P. Assawes,
S. R. Shin, M. R. Dokmeci, R. Oklu andR. A. Khademhosseini, Ann. Biomed. Eng. , 2017, 45,
148 –163.
5 Y. S. Zhang, M. Duchamp, R. Oklu, L. W. Ellisen,
R. Langer and A. Khademhosseini, ACS Biomater. Sci. Eng. ,
2016, 2, 1710 –1721.
6 J. K. Carrow, P. Kerativitayanan, M. K. Jaiswal,
G. Lokhande and A. K. Gaharwar, in Essentials of 3D
Biofabrication and Translation , ed. A. A. J. Yoo, Academic
Press, Boston, 2015, pp. 229 –248.
7 S. Wüst, R. Müller and S. Hofmann, J. Funct. Biomater. ,
2011, 2, 119 –154.8 A. B. Dababneh and I. T. Ozbolat, J. Manuf. Sci. Eng. , 2014,
136, 061016 –061016.
9 S. Khalil and W. Sun, J. Biomech. Eng. , 2009, 131, 111002.
10 Z. Wang, R. Abdulla, B. Parker, R. Samanipour, S. Ghosh
and K. Kim, Biofabrication , 2015, 7, 045009.
11 H. J. Lee, Y. B. Kim, S. H. Ahn, J.-S. Lee, C. H. Jang,
H. Yoon, W. Chun and G. H. Kim, Adv. Healthcare Mater. ,
2015, 4, 1359 –1368.
12 Y. Loo, A. Lakshmanan, M. Ni, L. L. Toh, S. Wang and
C. A. E. Hauser, Nano Lett. , 2015, 15, 6919 –6925.
13 D.-Y. Lee, H. Lee, Y. Kim, S. Y. Yoo, W.-J. Chung and
G. Kim, Acta Biomater. , 2016, 29, 112 –
124.
14 R. K. Bregg, Current Topics in Polymer Research ,N o v a
Publishers, 2005.
15 C. C. Chang, E. D. Boland, S. K. Williams and
J. B. Hoying, J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part B , 2011, 98, 160 –
170.
16 L. Koch, A. Deiwick, S. Schlie, S. Michael, M. Gruene,
V. Coger, D. Zychlinski, A. Schambach, K. Reimers,
P. M. Vogt and B. Chichkov, Biotechnol. Bioeng. , 2012, 109,
1855 –1863.
17 S. Michael, H. Sorg, C.-T. Peck, L. Koch, A. Deiwick,
B. Chichkov, P. M. Vogt and K. Reimers, PLoS One , 2013,
8, e57741.
18 V. Lee, G. Singh, J. P. Trasatti, C. Bjornsson, X. Xu,
T. N. Tran, S.-S. Yoo, G. Dai and P. Karande, Tissue Eng.,
Part C , 2014, 20, 473 –484.
19 S. Moon, S. K. Hasan, Y. S. Song, F. Xu, H. O. Keles,
F. Manzur, S. Mikkilineni, J. W. Hong, J. Nagatomi,
E. Haeggstrom, A. Khademhosseini and U. Demirci,Tissue Eng., Part C , 2010, 16, 157 –166.
20 D. F. Duarte Campos, A. Blaeser, A. Korsten, S. Neuss,
J. Jäkel, M. Vogt and H. Fischer, Tissue Eng., Part A , 2015,
21, 740 –756.
21 K. Jakab, A. Neagu, V. Mironov, R. R. Markwald and
G. Forgacs, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. U. S. A. , 2004, 101, 2864 –
2869.
22 K. Jakab, B. Damon, A. Neagu, A. Kachurin and
G. Forgacs, Biorheology , 2006, 43, 509 –513.
23 X. Cui, D. Dean, Z. M. Ruggeri and T. Boland, Biotechnol.
Bioeng. , 2010, 106, 963 –969.
24 J. Zhu and R. E. Marchant, Expert Rev. Med. Devices , 2011,
8, 607 –626.
25 A. O. Elzoghby, J. Controlled Release , 2013, 172, 1075 –
1091.
26 Q. Xing, K. Yates, C. Vogt, Z. Qian, M. C. Frost and
F. Zhao, Sci. Rep. , 2014, 4, 4706.
27 W. Schuurman, P. A. Levett, M. W. Pot, P. R. van Weeren,
W. J. A. Dhert, D. W. Hutmacher, F. P. W. Melchels,
T. J. Klein and J. Malda,
Macromol. Biosci. , 2013, 13, 551 –
561.
28 J. W. Nichol, S. T. Koshy, H. Bae, C. M. Hwang,
S. Yamanlar and A. Khademhosseini, Biomaterials , 2010,
31, 5536 –5544.
29 T. Zhang, K. C. Yan, L. Ouyang and W. Sun, Biofabrication ,
2013, 5, 045010.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online30 M. Neufurth, X. Wang, H. C. Schröder, Q. Feng, B. Diehl-
Seifert, T. Ziebart, R. Ste ﬀen, S. Wang and W. E. G. Müller,
Biomaterials , 2014, 35, 8810 –8819.
31 B. Duan, L. A. Hockaday, K. H. Kang and J. T. Butcher,
J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A , 2013, 101, 1255 –1264.
32 S. Wüst, M. E. Godla, R. Müller and S. Hofmann, Acta
Biomater. , 2014, 10, 630 –640.
33 K. Yue, G. Trujillo-de Santiago, M. M. Alvarez, A. Tamayol,
N. Annabi and A. Khademhosseini, Biomaterials , 2015, 73,
254 –271.
34 Y.-C. Chen, R.-Z. Lin, H. Qi, Y. Yang, H. Bae, J. M. Melero-
Martin and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Funct. Mater. , 2012,
22, 2027 –2039.
35 H. Shin, B. D. Olsen and A. Khademhosseini,
Biomaterials , 2012, 33, 3143 –3152.
36 C. B. Hutson, J. W. Nichol, H. Aubin, H. Bae, S. Yamanlar,
S. Al-Haque, S. T. Koshy and A. Khademhosseini, Tissue
Eng., Part A , 2011, 17, 1713 –1723.
37 W. Xiao, J. He, J. W. Nichol, L. Wang, C. B. Hutson,
B. Wang, Y. Du, H. Fan and A. Khademhosseini, Acta
Biomater. , 2011, 7, 2384 –2393.
38 L. E. Bertassoni, J. C. Cardoso, V. Manoharan,
A. L. Cristino, N. S. Bhise, W. A. Araujo, P. Zorlutuna,
N. E. Vrana, A. M. Ghaemmaghami, M. R. Dokmeci andA. Khademhosseini, Biofabrication , 2014, 6, 024105.
39 D. B. Kolesky, R. L. Truby, A. S. Gladman, T. A. Busbee,
K. A. Homan and J. A. Lewis, Adv. Mater. , 2014, 26, 3124 –
3130.
40 A. Skardal, J. Zhang, L. McCoard, X. Xu,
S. Oottamasathien and G. D. Prestwich, Tissue Eng., Part
A, 2010, 16, 2675 –2685.
41 B. Duan, E. Kapetanovic, L. A. Hockaday and J. T. Butcher,
Acta Biomater. , 2014, 10, 1836 –1846.
42 A. C. Daly, S. E. Critchley, E. M. Rencsok and D. J. Kelly,
Biofabrication , 2016,
8, 045002.
43 R. Levato, W. R. Webb, I. A. Otto, A. Mensinga, Y. Zhang,
M. van Rijen, R. van Weeren, I. M. Khan and J. Malda,
Acta Biomater. , 2017, 61,4 1 –53.
44 T. Rajangam and S. S. A. An, Int. J. Nanomed. , 2013, 8,
3641 –3662.
45 X. Cui and T. Boland, Biomaterials , 2009, 30, 6221 –6227.
46 M. Nakamura, S. Iwanaga, C. Henmi, K. Arai and
Y. Nishiyama, Biofabrication , 2010, 2, 014110.
47 T. Xu, K. W. Binder, M. Z. Albanna, D. Dice, W. Zhao,
J. J. Yoo and A. Atala, Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 015001.
48 M. Gruene, M. Pflaum, C. Hess, S. Diamantouros,
S. Schlie, A. Deiwick, L. Koch, M. Wilhelmi,
S. Jockenhoevel, A. Haverich and B. Chichkov, Tissue Eng.,
Part C , 2011, 17, 973 –982.
49 A. L. Rutz, K. E. Hyland, A. E. Jakus, W. R. Burghardt and
R. N. Shah, Adv. Mater. , 2015, 27, 1607 –1614.
50 C. Vepari and D. L. Kaplan, Prog. Polym. Sci. , 2007, 32,
991 –1007.
51 K. Schacht, T. Jüngst, M. Schweinlin, A. Ewald, J. Groll
and T. Scheibel, Angew. Chem., Int. Ed. , 2015, 54, 2816 –
2820.52 S. Das, F. Pati, Y.-J. Choi, G. Rijal, J.-H. Shim, S. W. Kim,
A. R. Ray, D.-W. Cho and S. Ghosh, Acta Biomater. , 2015,
11, 233 –246.
53 K. Y. Lee and D. J. Mooney, Prog. Polym. Sci. , 2012, 37,
106 –126.
54 Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, A. Akkouch, A. Dababneh, F. Dolati and
I. T. Ozbolat, Biomater. Sci. , 2014, 3, 134 –143.
55 J. Jia, D. J. Richards, S. Pollard, Y. Tan, J. Rodriguez,
R .P .V i s c o n t i ,T .C .T r u s k ,M .J .Y o s t ,H .Y a o ,R .R .M a r k w a l dand Y. Mei, Acta Biomater. , 2014, 10, 4323
–4331.
56 J. Yan, Y. Huang and D. B. Chrisey, Biofabrication , 2013, 5,
015002.
57 P. de Vos, M. M. Faas, B. Strand and R. Calafiore,
Biomaterials , 2006, 27, 5603 –5617.
58 Y. A. Mørch, M. Qi, P. O. M. Gundersen, K. Formo,
I. Lacik, G. Skjåk-Braek, J. Oberholzer and B. L. Strand,
J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A , 2012, 100, 2939 –2947.
59 Y. Yu, Y. Zhang, J. A. Martin and I. T. Ozbolat, J. Biomech.
Eng., 2013, 135, 91011.
60 Y. Zhang, Y. Yu, H. Chen and I. T. Ozbolat, Biofabrication ,
2013, 5, 025004.
61 Q. Gao, Y. He, J. Fu, A. Liu and L. Ma, Biomaterials , 2015,
61, 203 –215.
62 H. Gudapati, J. Yan, Y. Huang and D. B. Chrisey,
Biofabrication , 2014, 6, 035022.
63 B. Guillotin, A. Souquet, S. Catros, M. Duocastella,
B. Pippenger, S. Bellance, R. Bareille, M. Rémy,L. Bordenave, J. Amédée and F. Guillemot, Biomaterials ,
2010, 31, 7250 –7256.
64 D. Kingsley, A. Dias, D. Chrisey and D. Corr,
Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 045006.
65 L. Gasperini, D. Maniglio, A. Motta and C. Migliaresi,
Tissue Eng., Part C , 2015, 21, 123 –132.
66 S. K. Williams, J. S. Touroo, K. H. Church and
J. B. Hoying, BioRes. Open Access , 2013, 2, 448 –454.
67 K. Nair, M. Gandhi, S. Khalil, K. C. Yan, M. Marcolongo,
K. Barbee and W. Sun, Biotechnol. J. , 2009, 4, 1168 –1177.
68 R. Chang, K. Emami, H. Wu and W. Sun, Biofabrication ,
2010, 2, 045004.
69 J. Kundu, J.-H. Shim, J. Jang, S.-W. Kim and D.-W. Cho,
J. Tissue Eng. Regener. Med. , 2015, 9, 1286 –1297.
70 W. Schuurman, V. Khristov, M. W. Pot, P. R. van Weeren,
W. J. A. Dhert and J. Malda, Biofabrication , 2011,
3,
021001.
71 C. Xu, W. Chai, Y. Huang and R. R. Markwald, Biotechnol.
Bioeng. , 2012, 109, 3152 –3160.
72 C. Xu, M. Zhang, Y. Huang, A. Ogale, J. Fu and
R. R. Markwald, Langmuir , 2014, 30, 9130 –9138.
73 M. Mobed-Miremadi, E. Acks, S. Polsaward and D. Chen,
Artif. Cells, Blood Substitutes, Immobilization Biotechnol. ,
2011, 39, 310 –316.
74 A. H. Bacelar, J. Silva-Correia, J. M. Oliveira and R. L. Reis,
J. Mater. Chem. B , 2016, 4, 6164 –6174.
75 T. Wuestenberg, Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives in the
Food Industry: Fundamentals and Applications , John Wiley
& Sons, 2014.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online76 J. T. Oliveira, L. Martins, R. Picciochi, P. B. Malafaya,
R. A. Sousa, N. M. Neves, J. F. Mano and R. L. Reis,
J. Biomed. Mater. Res., Part A , 2010, 93, 852 –863.
77 F. P. W. Melchels, W. J. A. Dhert, D. W. Hutmacher and
J. Malda, J. Mater. Chem. B , 2014, 2, 2282 –2289.
78 K. Buyukhatipoglu, W. Jo, W. Sun and A. M. Clyne,
Biofabrication , 2009, 1, 035003.
79 R. Lozano, L. Stevens, B. C. Thompson, K. J. Gilmore,
R. Gorkin III, E. M. Stewart, M. in het Panhuis,M. Romero-Ortega and G. G. Wallace, Biomaterials , 2015,
67, 264 –273.
80 J. Visser, B. Peters, T. J. Burger, J. Boomstra,
W. J. A. Dhert, F. P. W. Melchels and J. Malda,
Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 035007.
81 R. Levato, J. Visser, J. A. Planell, E. Engel, J. Malda and
M. A. Mateos-Timoneda, Biofabrication , 2014, 6,
035020.
82 J. Monslow, P. Govindaraju and E. Puré, Front. Immunol. ,
2015, 6, 231.
83 P. N. Sudha and M. H. Rose, Adv. Food Nutr. Res. , 2014,
72, 137 –176.
84 M. K. Cowman, T. A. Schmidt, P. Raghavan and A. Stecco,
F1000Research , 2015, 4, 622.
85 J. Y. Park, J.-C. Choi, J.-H. Shim, J.-S. Lee, H. Park,
S. W. Kim, J. Doh and D.-W. Cho, Biofabrication , 2014, 6,
035004.
86 A. Skardal, J. Zhang, L. McCoard, S. Oottamasathien and
G. D. Prestwich, Adv. Mater. , 2010, 22, 4736 –4740.
87 M. Kesti, M. Müller, J. Becher, M. Schnabelrauch,
M. D ’Este, D. Eglin and M. Zenobi-Wong, Acta Biomater. ,
2015, 11, 162 –172.
88 G. Sun and J. J. Mao, Nanomed. , 2012, 7, 1771 –1784.
89 L. Pescosolido, W. Schuurman, J. Malda, P. Matricardi,
F. Alhaique, T. Coviello, P. R. van Weeren, W. J. A. Dhert,
W. E. Hennink and T. Vermonden, Biomacromolecules ,
2011, 12, 1831
–1838.
90 L. Gasperini, J. F. Mano and R. L. Reis, J. R. Soc., Interface ,
2014, 11, 20140817.
91 A. Blaeser, D. F. Duarte Campos, M. Weber, S. Neuss,
B. Theek, H. Fischer and W. Jahnen-Dechent, BioRes.
Open Access , 2013, 2, 374 –384.
92 D. F. Duarte Campos, A. Blaeser, M. Weber, J. Jäkel,
S. Neuss, W. Jahnen-Dechent and H. Fischer,
Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 015003.
93 F. Xu, B. Sridharan, N. G. Durmus, S. Wang, A. S. Yavuz,
U. A. Gurkan and U. Demirci, PLoS One , 2011, 6, e19344.
94 T. Dai, M. Tanaka, Y.-Y. Huang and M. R. Hamblin, Expert
Rev. Anti-Infect. Ther. , 2011, 9, 857 –879.
95 A. Martínez-Ruvalcaba, E. Chornet and D. Rodrigue,
Carbohydr. Polym. , 2007, 67, 586 –595.
96 F. Ahmadi, Z. Oveisi, S. M. Samani and Z. Amoozgar, Res.
Pharm. Sci. , 2015, 10,1–16.
97 J. E. Arenas-Herrera, I. K. Ko, A. Atala and J. J. Yoo,
Biomed. Mater. , 2013, 8, 014106.
98 P. M. Crapo, T. W. Gilbert and S. F. Badylak, Biomaterials ,
2011, 32, 3233 –3243.99 F. Pati, J. Jang, D.-H. Ha, S. Won Kim, J.-W. Rhie,
J.-H. Shim, D.-H. Kim and D.-W. Cho, Nat. Commun. ,
2014, 5, 3935.
100 F. Pati, D.-H. Ha, J. Jang, H. H. Han, J.-W. Rhie and
D.-W. Cho, Biomaterials , 2015, 62, 164 –175.
101 A. Skardal, M. Devarasetty, H.-W. Kang, I. Mead,
C. Bishop, T. Shupe, S. J. Lee, J. Jackson, J. Yoo, S. Soker
and A. Atala, Acta Biomater. , 2015, 25,2 4 –34.
102 C. S. Hughes, L. M. Postovit and G. A. Lajoie, Proteomics ,
2010, 10, 1886 –1890.
103 J. E. Snyder, Q. Hamid, C. Wang, R. Chang, K. Emami,
H. Wu and W. Sun, Biofabrication , 2011, 3, 034112.
104 M. T. Poldervaart, H. Wang, J. van der Stok, H. Weinans,
S. C. G. Leeuwenburgh, F. C. Öner, W. J. A. Dhert and
J. Alblas, PLoS One , 2013, 8, e72610.
105 L. Horváth, Y. Umehara, C. Jud, F. Blank, A. Petri-Fink
and B. Rothen-Rutishauser, Sci. Rep. , 2015, 5, 7974.
106 M. T. Poldervaart, H. Gremmels, K. van Deventer,
J. O. Fledderus, F. C. Oner, M. C. Verhaar, W. J. A. Dhert
and J. Alblas, J. Controlled Release , 2014, 184,5 8 –66.
107 J. Zhu, Biomaterials , 2010, 31, 4639 –4656.
108 W. Li, P. Zhan, E. De Clercq, H. Lou and X. Liu, Prog.
Polym. Sci. , 2013, 38, 421 –444.
109 J. G. Sathish, S. Sethu, M.-C. Bielsky, L. de Haan,
N. S. French, K. Govindappa, J. Green, C. E. M. Gri ﬃths,
S. Holgate, D. Jones, I. Kimber, J. Moggs, D. J. Naisbitt,
M. Pirmohamed, G. Reichmann, J. Sims,M. Subramanyam, M. D. Todd, J. W. Van Der Laan,
R. J. Weaver and B. K. Park, Nat. Rev. Drug Discovery , 2013,
12, 306 –324.
110 A. Skardal, J. Zhang and G. D. Prestwich, Biomaterials ,
2010, 31, 6173 –6181.
111 G. Gao, A. F. Schilling, T. Yonezawa, J. Wang, G. Dai and
X. Cui, Biotechnol. J. , 2014, 9, 1304 –1311.
112 S. Hong, D. Sycks, H. F. Chan, S. Lin, G. P. Lopez,
F. Guilak, K. W. Leong and X. Zhao, Adv. Mater. , 2015, 27,
4035 –4040.
113 F. Janvier, J. X. X. Zhu, J. Armstrong, H. J. Meiselman and
G. Cloutier, J. Mech. Behav. Biomed. Mater. , 2013, 18, 100 –
107.
114 N. C. Paxton, W. Smolan, T. Böck, F. P. W. Melchels,
J. Groll and T. Juengst, Biofabrication , 2017, 9(4),
044107.
115 A. Ribeiro, M. M. Blokzijl, R. Levato, C. W. Visser,
M. Castilho, W. E. Hennink, T. Vermonden and J. Malda,Biofabrication , 2017, 10(1), 014102.
116 K. Dubbin, A. Tabet and S. C. Heilshorn, Biofabrication ,
2017,
9, 044102.
117 M. Müller, J. Becher, M. Schnabelrauch and M. Zenobi-
Wong, Biofabrication , 2015, 7, 035006.
118 V. H. M. Mouser, A. Abbadessa, R. Levato, W. E. Hennink,
T. Vermonden, D. Gawlitta and J. Malda, Biofabrication ,
2017, 9, 015026.
119 S. Stichler, T. Böck, N. C. Paxton, S. Bertlein, R. Levato,
V. Schill, W. Smolan, J. Malda, J. Tessmar, T. Blunk and
J. Groll, Biofabrication , 2017, 9(4), 044108.Biomaterials Science Review
This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018 Biomater. Sci.
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online120 W. L. Ng, W. Y. Yeong and M. W. Naing, Materials , 2017,
10(2), E190.
121 G. M. Cooper, E. D. Miller, G. E. Decesare, A. Usas,
E. L. Lensie, M. R. Bykowski, J. Huard, L. E. Weiss,
J. E. Losee and P. G. Campbell, Tissue Eng., Part A , 2010,
16, 1749 –1759.
122 F. Marga, K. Jakab, C. Khatiwala, B. Shepherd,
S. Dorfman, B. Hubbard, S. Colbert and F. Gabor,
Biofabrication , 2012, 4, 022001.
123 C. Kucukgul, S. B. Ozler, I. Inci, E. Karakas, S. Irmak,
D. Gozuacik, A. Taralp and B. Koc, Biotechnol. Bioeng. ,
2015, 112, 811 –821.
124 K. Markstedt, A. Mantas, I. Tournier, H. Martínez Ávila,
D. Hägg and P. Gatenholm, Biomacromolecules , 2015, 16,
1489 –1496.
125 M. Müller, E. Öztürk, Ø. Arlov, P. Gatenholm and
M. Zenobi-Wong, Ann. Biomed. Eng. , 2017, 45,
210 –223.
126 H. Martínez Ávila, S. Schwarz, N. Rotter and
P. Gatenholm, Bioprinting , 2016, 1,2 2 –35.
127 K. Jakab, C. Norotte, B. Damon, F. Marga, A. Neagu,
C. L. Besch-Williford, A. Kachurin, K. H. Church, H. Park,
V. Mironov, R. Markwald, G. Vunjak-Novakovic and
G. Forgacs, Tissue Eng., Part A , 2008, 14, 413 –421.
128 V. Mironov, R. P. Visconti, V. Kasyanov, G. Forgacs,
C. J. Drake and R. R. Markwald, Biomaterials , 2009, 30,
2164 –2174.
129 C. A. Parzel, M. E. Pepper, T. Burg, R. E. Gro ﬀand
K. J. L. Burg, J. Tissue Eng. Regener. Med. , 2009, 3, 260 –
268.
130 C. M. Owens, F. Marga, G. Forgacs and C. M. Heesch,
Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 045007.
131 A. Faulkner-Jones, S. Greenhough, J. A. King, J. Gardner,
A. Courtney and W. Shu, Biofabrication , 2013, 5, 015013.
132 Z. Hajdu, V. Mironov, A. N. Mehesz, R. A. Norris,
R. R. Markwald and R. P. Visconti, J. Tissue Eng. Regener.
Med. , 2010, 4, 659 –664.
133 C. Norotte, F. S. Marga, L. E. Niklason and G. Forgacs,
Biomaterials , 2009, 30, 5910 –5917.
134 M. E. Pepper, R. E. Gro ﬀ, C. A. P. Cass, J. P. Mattimore,
T. Burg and K. J. L. Burg, Artif. Organs , 2012, 36, E151 –
E162.135 M. S. Mannoor, Z. Jiang, T. James, Y. L. Kong,
K. A. Malatesta, W. O. Soboyejo, N. Verma, D. H. Gracias
and M. C. McAlpine, Nano Lett. , 2013, 13, 2634 –2639.
136 K. Buyukhatipoglu, R. Chang, W. Sun and A. M. Clyne,
Tissue Eng., Part C , 2010, 16, 631 –642.
137 S. R. Shin, R. Farzad, A. Tamayol, V. Manoharan,
P. Mostafalu, Y. S. Zhang, M. Akbari, S. M. Jung, D. Kim,
M. Comotto, N. Annabi, F. E. Al-Hazmi, M. R. Dokmeci
and A. Khademhosseini, Adv. Mater. , 2016, 28, 3280 –3289.
138 K. Zhu, S. R. Shin, T. van Kempen, Y.-C. Li, V. Ponraj,
A. Nasajpour, S. Mandla, N. Hu, X. Liu, J. Leijten,
Y.-D. Lin, M. A. Hussain, Y. S. Zhang, A. Tamayol andA. Khademhosseini, Adv. Funct. Mater. , 2017, 27, 1605352.
139 S. V. Dorozhkin, Acta Biomater. , 2010, 6, 715 –734.
140 N. Roveri and M. Iafisco, Nanotechnol. Sci. Appl. , 2010, 3,
107 –125.
141 S. Catros, J.-C. Fricain, B. Guillotin, B. Pippenger,
R. Bareille, M. Remy, E. Lebraud, B. Desbat, J. Amédéeand F. Guillemot, Biofabrication , 2011, 3, 025001.
142 F. Guillemot, A. Souquet, S. Catros, B. Guillotin, J. Lopez,
M. Faucon, B. Pippenger, R. Bareille, M. Rémy,S. Bellance, P. Chabassier, J. C. Fricain and J. Amédée,
Acta Biomater. , 2010, 6, 2494 –2500.
143 R. Goldman, Adv. Skin Wound Care , 2004, 17,2 4 –35.
144 A. T. Grazul-Bilska, M. L. Johnson, J. J. Bilski,
D. A. Redmer, L. P. Reynolds, A. Abdullah and
K. M. Abdullah, Drugs Today , 2003, 39, 787 –800.
145 M. Atanasova and A. Whitty, Crit. Rev. Biochem. Mol. Biol. ,
2012, 47, 502 –530.
146 E. D. Miller, J. A. Phillippi, G. W. Fisher, P. G. Campbell,
L. M. Walker and L. E. Weiss, Comb. Chem. High
Throughput Screen. , 2009, 12, 604 –618.
147 L. Elowsson, H. Kirsebom, V. Carmignac, B. Mattiasson
and M. Durbeej, Biomater. Sci. , 2013, 1, 402 –410.
148 M. Gruene, M. Pflaum, A. Deiwick, L. Koch, S. Schlie,
C. Unger, M. Wilhelmi, A. Haverich and B. N. Chichkov,Biofabrication , 2011, 3, 015005.
149 R. El Assal, S. Guven, U. A. Gurkan, I. Gozen, H. Shafiee,
S. Dalbeyler, N. Abdalla, G. Thomas, W. Fuld,B. M. W. Illigens, J. Estanislau, J. Khoory, R. Kaufman,
C. Zylberberg, N. Lindeman, Q. Wen, I. Ghiran and
U. Demirci, Adv. Mater. , 2014, 26, 5815 –5822.Review Biomaterials Science
Biomater. Sci. This journal is © The Royal Society of Chemistry 2018
Published on 01 March 2018. Downloaded by University of California - Los Angeles on 06/03/2018 18:21:56. 
View Article Online